###1###SOGC CLINICAL PRACTICE GUIDELINE
No. 431  December 2022 (Replaces No. 235  October 2009 & No. 115  June 2002)
Guideline No. 431: Postpartum
Hemorrhage and Hemorrhagic Shock
(En français : Directive clinique no 431 : Hémorragie post-partum et choc hémorragique)
The English document is the original version. In the event of any discrepancy between the English and French content  the English version prevails.
This clinical practice guideline was prepared by the authors and
overseen by the SOGC Clinical Practice Obstetrics committee. Itwas reviewed by the SOGC Obstetrical Content Review
committee and approved by the SOGC Guideline Management
and Oversight Committee and SOGC Board of Directors.This clinical practice guideline supersedes No. 235  published inOctober 2009 and No. 115  published in June 2002.
Authors
debbie Robinson  MD  Winnipeg  MB
Melanie Basso  RN  MSN  Vancouver  BC
Cynthia Chan  MD  London  ON
Kirsten Duckitt  MD  Campbell River  BCRyan Lett  MD  Regina  SKSOGC Clinical Practice eObstetrics Committee (2022):
Douglas Black (past-Chair)  Mélina Castonguay  Cynthia Chan Elissa Cohen (co-Chair)  Christine Dallaire  Kirsten Duckitt 
Sebastian Hobson (co-Chair)  Isabelle Létourneau  Amy Metcalfe 
J. Larry Reynolds  debbie Robinson  Marie-Ève Roy-Lacroix Katherine Tyndall  Kathryn Versteeg
Acknowledgements: The authors would like to acknowledge
and thank special contributor Dr. Stephanie Cooper  MD  Calgary AB  for her extensive contribution to the appended PPH
Appendices.
Disclosures: Statements were received from all authors.
Dr. Ryan Lett has previously given lectures on intravenous ironand received an unrestricted educational honorarium from P ﬁzer;
he also sits on the National Advisory Committee on Blood and
Blood Products as a representative for Saskatchewan. No other
relationships or activities that could involve a con ﬂict of interest
were declared.
All authors have indicated that they meet the journal ’s
requirements for authorship.
Keywords: postpartum hemorrhage; therapeutics; hemorrhagic
shock; obstetric delivery; preventive medicine
Corresponding author : debbie Robinson 
debbie.robinson@umanitoba.caJ Obstet Gynaecol Can 2022;44(12):1293-1310
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jogc.2022.10.002
ª2022 The Society of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists of Canada/La
Société des obstétriciens et gynécologues du Canada. Published by
Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
This document re ﬂects emerging clinical and scienti ﬁc advances as of the publication date and is subject to change. The information is not
meant to dictate an exclusive course of treatment or procedure. Institutions are free to amend the recommendations. The SOGC suggests 
however  that they adequately document any such amendments.
Informed consent: Patients have the right and responsibility to make informed decisions about their care in partnership with their health care
provider. In order to facilitate informed choice  patients should be provided with information and support that is evidence-based  culturallyappropriate  and personalized. The values  beliefs and individual needs of each patient in the context of their personal circumstances should beconsidered and the ﬁnal decision about care and treatment options chosen by the patient should be respected.
Language and inclusivity: The SOGC recognizes the importance to be fully inclusive and when context is appropriate  gender-neutral lan-
guage will be used. In other circumstances  we continue to use gendered language because of our mission to advance women ’s health. The
SOGC recognizes and respects the rights of all people for whom the information in this document may apply  including but not limited totransgender  non-binary  and intersex people. The SOGC encourages health care providers to engage in respectful conversation with their
patients about their gender identity and preferred gender pronouns and to apply these guidelines in a way that is sensitive to each person ’s
needs.It is the Society of Obstetrician and Gynaecologists of Canada (SOGC) policy to review the content 5 years after publication  at which
time the document may be revised to re ﬂect new evidence or the document may be archived
DECEMBER JOGC DÉCEMBRE 2022 l1293
Downloaded for Anonymous User (n/a) at University of the Andes from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on August 19  
2023. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2023. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
###2###RECOMMENDED CHANGES IN PRACTICE
1. Quantitative blood loss measurement should replace
estimated blood loss for all deliveries.
2. Maximum single dose oxytocin doses should be 3 IU IV rapid
injection  or 10 IU intramuscular
3. In cases of severe obstetrical hemorrhage  the calculated
maximum allowable blood loss and lab-based (or point-of-careebased) factor replacement should guide treatment
whenever possible.
4. Misoprostol should only be used sublingually or orally for the
prevention and treatment of postpartum hemorrhage.
KEY MESSAGES
1. Reducing the risk of postpartum hemorrhage begins
antenatally and continued vigilance is needed throughout
labour to recognize abnormal postpartum bleeding early.
2. Appropriate recognition and treatment of postpartum
hemorrhage can prevent serious morbidity while reducing
costs to the health care system by minimizing costly
interventions and length of hospital stays.
3. Simulation training followed by formal debrie ﬁng will improve
outcomes in the clinical setting.
ABSTRACT
Objective: This guideline aims to provide evidence for prevention 
recognition  and treatment of postpartum hemorrhage includingsevere hemorrhage leading to hemorrhagic shock.
Target population: All pregnant patients.
Bene ﬁts  harms  and costs: Appropriate recognition and treatment of
postpartum hemorrhage can prevent serious morbidity whilereducing costs to the health care system by minimizing more costlyinterventions and length of hospital stays.
Evidence: Medical literature  PubMed  ClinicalTrials.gov   the
Cochrane Database  and grey literature were searched for articles published between 2012 and 2021  on postpartum hemorrhage uterotonics  obstetrical hemorrhage  and massive hemorrhage
protocols.
Validation methods: The authors rated the quality of evidence and
strength of recommendations using the Grading of
Recommendations Assessment  Development and Evaluation
(GRADE) approach. See online Appendix A (Tables A1 for
deﬁnitions and A2for interpretations of strong and conditional
[weak] recommendations).
Intended Audience: All members of the health care team who care for
labouring or postpartum women  including  but not restricted to nurses  midwives  family physicians  obstetricians  andanesthesiologists.
RECOMMENDATIONS
1. An individualized risk assessment for postpartum hemorrhage
should be documented in a checklist upon arrival to a labour unitand updated throughout labour and delivery ( strong  high ). The riskassessment should include a calculation of the maximum allow-
able blood loss ( good practice point ).
2. Both antenatal and postnatal anemia should be identi ﬁed and
treated aggressively ( strong  high ).
3. Quantitative blood loss measurement should replace estimated
blood loss in all patients whenever possible ( strong  moderate ).
4. Staging and management of postpartum hemorrhage should be
based on quantitative blood loss ( strong  high ).
5. Active management of the third stage of labour should be offered
to all women ( strong  high ).
6. Prophylactic intramuscular oxytocin can be used for patients at low
risk for postpartum hemorrhage ( strong  high ).
7. For patients at high risk of postpartum hemorrhage  prophylactic
intravenous oxytocin should be used ( conditional  moderate ).
8. When given intravenously  oxytocin can be given either as a rapid
infusion (max rate 1 IU/min) for 4 minutes  followed by 7.5 e15 IU/h
or as a 3 IU intravenous rapid injection ( strong  moderate )
9. If there is inadequate response to oxytocin within 4 minutes  a
second-line uterotonic should be administered ( strong  high ).
10. Carbetocin can be considered as a ﬁrst-line agent for postpartum
hemorrhage prophylaxis at cesarean delivery ( strong  moderate ).
11. Bimanual uterine compression and bladder emptying should be
performed as ﬁrst-line measures while waiting for pharmacologic
agents to take effect ( good practice point ).
12. Misoprostol (sublingual/oral) is an effective adjunct to prophylactic
or therapeutic oxytocin in high-risk individuals ( strong  high )
13. Intramuscular ergotamine and intramuscular or intramyometrial
carboprost  can both be used to treat active postpartum hemor-
rhage (
strong  high ).
14. Rectal misoprostol is inferior to other routes (both in onset and in
bioavailability) and should not be used ( strong  moderate ).
15. Tranexamic acid can be used in all patients as an adjunct to ute-
rotonics in the setting of postpartum hemorrhage  and can be used
as a prophylactic agent in patients at high risk for postpartumhemorrhage ( strong  high ).
16. Uterine tamponade is an effective tool and should be considered
for ongoing mild to moderate bleeding ( conditional  moderate ).
17. If the placenta has not been expelled spontaneously in the 30
minutes following delivery  measures should be taken to expeditedelivery of the placenta ( strong  high ).
18. When there is ongoing bleeding  examine the patient for the
presence of clots  retained placental tissue  or genital tract lacer-ations ( good practice point ).
19. In the case of uterine inversion  if immediate reversion is not
possible  transfer the patient to an operating room for uterinerelaxation and patient stabilization  as required ( good practice
point )
20. If pharmacologic interventions have not controlled
bleeding  surgical intervention should be undertaken promptly(strong  high )
21. Compression sutures  ligation of uterine or internal iliac arteries 
and uterine artery embolization are all effective interventions that
can be considered; however  hysterectomy should not be delayedin an unstable patient ( strong  high ).
22. Severe obstetrical hemorrhage should be managed by a multi-
disciplinary team consisting of obstetrics  anaesthesia  nursing and transfusion medicine ( strong  high ).
23. An obstetrical massive hemorrhage protocol  including de ﬁned
roles and responsibilities of each team member  should be used
(strong  moderate ).
24. Initial resuscitative and monitoring measures should include
intravenous access /C22  electrocardiography  oxygen saturation 
blood pressure  placement of an indwelling urethral catheter 
euthermia  and volume replacement with balanced crystalloid(good practice point ).
1294
lDECEMBER JOGC DÉCEMBRE 2022SOGC CLINICAL PRACTICE GUIDELINE
Downloaded for Anonymous User (n/a) at University of the Andes from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on August 19  
2023. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2023. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
###3###25. Four units red blood cells should be given prior to other blood
products in an actively bleeding patient who is approaching themaximum allowable blood loss  unless the patient has a coagu-
lation defect ( strong  moderate )
26. Fibrinogen levels should be measured in every moderate to severe
case of postpartum hemorrhage  and if <2 g/L  should be replaced
accordingly ( strong  high ).27. A massive hemorrhage protocol with ratios of red blood cells
to fresh frozen plasma to platelets of 1:1:1: or 2:1:1 canbe used in the absence of timely lab results ( strong 
moderate ).
28. Simulation training with all members of the multidisciplinary team
should occur on a regular basis  ideally by a trained facilitator
(strong  high ).
DECEMBER JOGC DÉCEMBRE 2022
l1295PPH and Hemorrhagic Shock
Downloaded for Anonymous User (n/a) at University of the Andes from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on August 19  
2023. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2023. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
###4###INTRODUCTION
Postpartum hemorrhage (PPH) continues to be a sig-
niﬁcant contributor to maternal morbidity and mor-
tality  even in developed countries.1Between 2003 and 2010 
the incidence of PPH in Canada was 5.6 per 100 deliveries.
International data from high resource countries suggest the
rate is closer to 10% when blood loss is actually measured 2
and this rate continues to rise  with uterine atony being the
primary cause.3 4The traditional de ﬁnition of blood loss as
/C21500 mL with vaginal delivery or /C211000 mL with cesarean
delivery (CD) is no longer suf ﬁcient  as visual estimates have
been found to be inaccurate  even for experienced pro-
viders.5 6In addition  many women of reproductive age
maintain normal vital signs despite blood loss beyond these
amounts. Since these factors can lead to delays in treatment
causing adverse maternal outcomes 7 8accurate and cumu-
lative measurement of blood loss has emerged as the newstandard of care.
9
Prevention is key to reducing maternal morbidity from
PPH  as 60% of these patients have at least one identi ﬁable
antepartum or intrapartum risk factor.10Assessment for
these risk factors  as well as early intervention  are integral
to mitigating potential adverse outcomes.
This guideline provides a new approach to the early
identi ﬁcation and management of PPH. Recommenda-
tions are based on emerging data that highlight the suc-cesses of obstetrical hemorrhage toolkits and care bundles
in reducing maternal morbidity and mortality.
The California Maternal Quality Care Collaborative
implemented a quality improvement initiative that led to a
reduction in PPH of 20.8%  compared with 1.2% in non-
participating hospitals.
11This guideline presents an
adapted model to prevent and manage PPH and com-
prises the following categories:
1. RISK ASSESSMENT
2. RISK REDUCTION
3. RECOGNIZE AND RE-EVALUATE
4. REACT5. RESUSCITATE
6. REVIEW
RISK ASSESSMENT
Causes and Risk Factors
The four Ts (tone  tissue  trauma  thrombin) are well
known. Evaluation of risk factors in each of these cate-
gories is important to determine a potential cause of PPH
(Table 1 ).Individualized risk should be documented in a
checklist upon arrival to a labour unit and updated
throughout labour and delivery (Appendix B ). Patients at
high risk for PPH deliver in a facility with easy access to amassive hemorrhage protocol (MHP) that takes into
consideration local blood product supply  transport  and
access to specialist advice.
Anemia
Women with anemia (Hb <110 g/L) have less reserve to
cope with PPH. Anemia may also reduce oxygen deliveryto myometrial muscles resulting in uterine atony.
12In
addition  iron is a necessary cofactor for adenosine
triphosphate (ATP) production in muscle cells  and iron
deﬁciency itself may contribute to uterine atony.13
Iron de ﬁciency anemia is a signi ﬁcant health problem for
women worldwide.14The prevalence of iron de ﬁciency
anemia in pregnancy is estimated at 41%  with higher rates
in low socioeconomic populations.14A study  conducted in
Toronto  Canada  of pregnant women screened for iron
deﬁciency anemia found that 91% of participants were iron
deﬁcient (ferritin <50mg/L)  with most having severe iron
deﬁciency with a ferritin <20mg/L despite only 25% of
participants having a hemoglobin level <110 g/L.15These
ﬁndings highlight the fact that by the time a low hemoglobin
is detected  the iron de ﬁciency is profound. Both hemo-
globin and ferritin should be measured antenatally.
Anemia and iron de ﬁciency should be assessed and treated
at or before 28 weeks gestation. Ferrous salts  taken dailyor every other day  on an empty stomach is the ideal
method of iron supplementation.
16There is insuf ﬁcient
evidence to routinely co-administer ascorbic acid (vitamin
C).17Intravenous iron should be given if there is no
response (increase in Hb of 10 g/L) within 2 weeks.18
Postpartum anemia contributes to fatigue  postpartum
depression  poor bonding  and poor lactation.19 20Oral
iron supplementation should continue for at least 3
months postpartum and intravenous (IV) iron considered
with hemoglobin <80 g/L  regardless of symptoms.16ABBREVIATIONS
CD cesarean delivery
MABL maximum allowable blood loss
MHP massive hemorrhage protocol
PPH postpartum hemorrhage
TXA tranexamic acid
1296 lDECEMBER JOGC DÉCEMBRE 2022SOGC CLINICAL PRACTICE GUIDELINE
Downloaded for Anonymous User (n/a) at University of the Andes from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on August 19  
2023. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2023. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
###5###RISK REDUCTION
The California Collaborative found that underestimating
blood loss and relying on vital signs led to health care
providers underestimating the severity of PPH and  more
importantly  led to delays in treatment.11Denial is delay
should be the new theme for PPH management strate-
gies.11The bene ﬁt of one or more PPH bundles (con-
taining key medications  instruments  tamponade devices sponges  sutures  etc.) can decrease the time to treatment
by having all potentially needed materials readily available.
Accurate Measurement of Blood Loss
Since visual estimates grossly underestimate the true volumeof blood loss  it is recommended that labour units begin to
accurately monitor and record ongoing bleeding .D r y
weights of sponges  towels  sheets  and other commonly
soaked surfaces should be recorded on a standard form thatcan be accessed at any time to properly evaluate blood loss
in any patient. Measuring amniotic ﬂu i di nt h ed r a p e( c a l i -
brated cones are available) and wiping the ﬂuid off the ﬂoor
before active bleeding begins will distinguish it from any
postpartum bleeding. Whenever possible  suction the am-
niotic ﬂuid at CD prior to delivering the infant and docu-
ment its volume. Everything suctioned after this point
should be considered blood loss. Sponges  towels  and
drapes should be collected and weighed. A record of cu-
mulative blood loss for the ﬁrst 24 hours should be kept.
Estimated blood loss should be replaced by quantitative
(measured) blood loss ( Appendices C  D  E  F ).
Classi ﬁcation and Management Protocols for
Stages of Postpartum Hemorrhage
A staging system based on quantitative blood loss 
regardless of vital signs  with detailed managementTable 1. Postpartum hemorrhage risk factors
Etiology Risk Factors
Tone (uterine atony) Uterine overdistension /C15Polyhydramnios
/C15Multiple gestation
/C15Macrosomia
Uterine exhaustion /C15Precipitous or prolonged labour
/C15Prolonged oxytocin use
/C15High parity
/C15General anaesthesia
/C15Anemia
Infection /C15Prolonged rupture of membranes
/C15Chorioamnionitis
Dysfunctional uterine activity /C15Fibroids
/C15Placenta previa
Tissue Retained products of conception Incomplete placental delivery (succenturiate lobe 
morbidly adherent placenta)
Trauma Laceration of cervix  vagina  perineum /C15Precipitous or operative delivery
/C15Episiotomy extension
/C15Fetal malposition
Extension/lacerations at cesarean /C15Deep engagement
/C15Prolonged second stage
/C15Fetal malposition
Uterine rupture Previous uterine surgery
Uterine inversion /C15Nulliparity with fundal placenta
/C15Excessive cord traction
Thrombin Pre-existing states /C15Hereditary coagulopathies (von Willebrand disease  hemophilia)
/C15Idiopathic thrombotic purpura
Acquired in pregnancy /C15Preeclampsia
/C15Disseminated intravascular coagulopathy
/C15Fetal demise
/C15Severe infection
/C15Abruption
/C15Amniotic ﬂuid embolism
Iatrogenic /C15Therapeutic anticoagulation
DECEMBER JOGC DÉCEMBRE 2022 l1297PPH and Hemorrhagic Shock
Downloaded for Anonymous User (n/a) at University of the Andes from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on August 19  
2023. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2023. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
###6###protocols for each stage should be implemented.21(Clas-
siﬁcation in Table 2   for a more detailed table including
expanded management protocols see Appendix G )
Active Management of the Third Stage of Labour
The SOGC ﬁrst commented on the active management of
the third stage of labour in 2000.22Three elements were
originally included: a uterotonic after delivery of the
anterior shoulder  early cord clamping  and cord traction to
deliver the placenta. Since that time  delayed cord clamping
has become the standard of care as it improves neonatal
outcomes without increasing the incidence of PPH.23
Furthermore  in multiple trials and reviews  controlledcord traction has been shown to only decrease the lengthof the third stage by 4-6 minutes and blood loss by
<30 mL.
24e28Since there is limited evidence to suggest
that expediting delivery of the placenta before 30 minutes
reduces the risk of PPH in an uncomplicated delivery 22
the de ﬁnition of active management of the third stage of
labour should be con ﬁned to the use of a uterotonic.
Providers choosing to employ controlled cord traction
should only do so after signs of placental separation  and
traction should be performed with uterine contraction as
these measures reduce the risk of uterine inversion  cord
avulsion  and partial detachment of the placenta.
Although prophylaxis with oxytocin for all patients has been
common practice  a 2019 Cochrane review found no clear
beneﬁt to routine uterotonics in terms of PPH or hemo-
globin in women at low risk of PPH  based on low quality
evidence.29They concluded that women at low risk for PPHshould be given the necessary information regarding the
beneﬁts and risks of active management of the third stage of
labour in order to make informed choices about their care.
Skin to skin contact may independently reduce the length of
the third stage.30
Oxytocin Free Interval Prior to Cesarean Delivery
The longer oxytocin is used for the induction or
augmentation of labour  the less responsive the uterus
becomes to it. Tran et al. showed a statistically signi ﬁcant
association between the length of the oxytocin free interval
prior to CD and the total estimated blood loss with the
greatest bene ﬁt after 1 hour.31While the reduction in
blood loss in patients with a low BMI was not clinicallysigniﬁcant (7 mL/10-min recovery interval)  the greatest
beneﬁt was seen in women with a BMI >40 kg/m
2  where
blood loss was reduced by 45 mL per 10-minute recovery
interval up to a maximum of 450 mL at 99 minutes. In
these women  higher amounts and longer durations of
oxytocin use were associated with an increased need for a
second-line uterotonic agent. When maternal and fetal
conditions are stable  providing an oxytocin wash-out in-
terval may be bene ﬁcial  particularly when the patient ’s
BMI is >40 kg/m2.
Prophylactic Uterotonics ( Table 3 )
Oxytocin
Numerous trials over more than 2 decades continue to
show that oxytocin is the drug of choice for both the
prevention and treatment of PPH.32Compared with pla-
cebo  ergometrine  carboprost  or misoprostol  oxytocin isTable 2. Classi ﬁcation and management of PPH by stage
Blood loss  mL BP  mm HgaHR  bpmaSigns/symptoms Initial managementb
Stage 0 /C15<500 vaginal
/C15<1000 CDNormal <100 Asymptomatic Active or physiologic management
of the third stage
Stage 1 (mild) /C15500-1000 vaginal
/C151000 CDNormal <110 Often asymptomatic  or may
have signs of severe PPHTherapeutic ﬁrst-line uterotonic
Stage 2
(moderate)1000-1500 Postural
hypotension
(SBP 80-100)>110 May be asymptomatic  or
may have signs of
severe PPH/C15Second-line uterotonic
/C15Look for other causes
Stage 3
(severe)>1500 SBP <80 >120 /C15Diaphoresis
/C15Delayed capillary re ﬁll time
/C15Tachypnea
/C15Pallor
/C15Oliguria/anuria
/C15Decreased level of
consciousness
/C15Agitation
/C15Cool extremitiesFull resuscitation protocol
aBP and HR may be variable.
bExpanded in Appendix G .
BP: blood pressure; CD: cesarean delivery; HR: heart rate; PPH: postpartum hemorrhage; SBP: systolic blood pressure.
1298 lDECEMBER JOGC DÉCEMBRE 2022SOGC CLINICAL PRACTICE GUIDELINE
Downloaded for Anonymous User (n/a) at University of the Andes from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on August 19  
2023. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2023. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
###7###either more effective  has fewer adverse effects  or
both.33e35While the uterus is increasingly responsive to
oxytocin as pregnancy progresses  there are fewer re-
ceptors in the lower uterine segment than in the fundus 
and oxytocin has no direct effects on the cervix.36
Oxytocin is most commonly given by IV or intramus-cular injection  though some research has been done on
the inhaled and intramyometrial routes.
37 38For low-risk
patients  prophylaxis via any route is suf ﬁcient; for high-
risk patients  the IV route is preferred.39
Much research has been done on the effects of IV oxytocinat the time of CD. In an elective CD (no labour)  as little as
1 IU of oxytocin can achieve uterine tonus. While similar
studies have not been done in the context of a vaginal
birth  it is reasonable to assume that the uterus will be at
least as responsive after vaginal delivery than after an
intrapartum CD  where studies show an IV bolus of 3 IU
is sufﬁcient to cause maximal uterine tonus by 4 minutes.
40
Interestingly  a rapid IV infusion will provide the same
beneﬁt at 4 minutes  when approximately 3 e4I Uo f
oxytocin has entered the circulation.41 42
In order to avoid overdosing oxytocin  the infusion should
be put through a pump  hung as a separate mini-infusion
with only 4 IU in 100 mL. At this point  an infusion of
7.5e15 IU/h is suf ﬁcient to maintain uterine tone; ahigher infusion rate or additional IV boluses will not
provide any additional bene ﬁt. For high-risk patients  or
ongoing bleeding  a second-line agent should be added.
Oxytocin has known hemodynamic and cardiac side ef-
fects (mainly ST depression from vasoconstriction of
coronary arteries) that are seldom recognized after vaginal
birth  primarily because patients are not monitored to
detect them and because the clinical signs are attributed to
other causes. Fortunately  these side effects are short lived;
however  they have contributed to maternal death indeveloped countries.
43 44When oxytocin is given quickly 
hypotension and ST changes begin to appear after as little
as 1 IU is administered but do not become noticeable until
3 IU is administered; these signs are signi ﬁcant at
/C215I U .40At 10 IU  50% of women will experience ST
depression  even non-pregnant  non-anesthetized control
patients.45These effects disappear when the 5 IU bolus
is given over 5 minutes. Rapid IV bolus should therefore
be restricted to 3 IU or less  and an IV infusion is
preferred.
Carbetocin
Carbetocin is a synthetic  long-acting  heat stable  analogue
of oxytocin with equivalent af ﬁnity for the oxytocin re-
ceptor. A single prophylactic 100 mg dose given IV over 30
seconds to 1 min provides similar or better clinical effectsTable 3. Prophylactic and ﬁrst-line therapeutic uterotonics
Oxytocin (Syntocinon  Pitocin) Carbetocin (Duratocin)
Use Prophylaxis Prophylaxis AND ﬁrst-line therapeutic Prophylaxis
Mechanism of action Uterotonic  direct stimulation of
oxytocin receptorsaUterotonic  direct stimulation of
oxytocin receptorsaStimulation of oxytocin
receptors
Dose and route /C153 IU IV rapid injection
/C1510 IU IM20e40 IU/L infusion erapid /C24þmin 
then 7e15 IU/h once tone achieved/C15100mg slow IV injection
(/C2130 s)
/C15100mgI M
Onset of clinical action /C151e2 min (IV)
/C153e7 min (IM)4 min with rapid infusion /C151e2 min IV
/C153e4 min IM
Half-life /C154e10 min (IV)
/C1515e30 min (IM)Ongoing 40 min
Duration of action /C1515e20 min (IV)
/C151e2 h (IM)Ongoing 1 h
Adverse effects /C15IV:
o<1I Uenone
o1e3I Ueminimal
o>3I Uedose-related
increase ST depression 
increase in HR  drop in BP
/C15IM: minimal/C15Water retention
/C15Note: rate above 15 IU/h ineffective
after 3 IU in circulation100mg dose side effects
equivalent to 5 IU slow
IV rapid injection oxytocin
Note: misoprostol and TXA may be given concurrently with these ﬁrst-line uterotonics for patients at high risk for PPH.
aDecreased effect with prolonged use. Increased effect after oxytocin free interval.
DECEMBER JOGC DÉCEMBRE 2022 l1299PPH and Hemorrhagic Shock
Downloaded for Anonymous User (n/a) at University of the Andes from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on August 19  
2023. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2023. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
###8###and similar side effects as a 5 IU IV bolus of oxytocin
given at the same rate 46 47and some studies have shown
smaller doses to be equally effective.48In addition  its long
half-life of 40 minutes reduces the need for additional
uterotonics when compared with oxytocin. The product
monograph states that severe preeclampsia/eclampsia is a
contraindication to its use; however  clinical trials in
women delivering vaginally or by cesarean found carbe-
tocin to be both safe and effective in this setting.49 50While
carbetocin has not been studied as a therapeutic agent for
active PPH  it should be considered a ﬁrst-line agent for
prophylaxis at CD. Emerging evidence suggests the use ofcarbetocin may also be considered as a ﬁrst-line prophy-
lactic uterotonic at vaginal delivery.
51
RECOGNIZE AND RE-EVALUATE
It is crucial for care providers to rapidly recognize wheninitial measures have not adequately controlled bleeding.
Failure to discern both the extent and source of bleedingwill needlessly delay appropriate intervention. Recording
quantitative blood loss and vital signs for every post-
partum patient will help health care providers recognize
when blood loss has moved between stages and can
prompt intervention ( Appendix G )
RE-EVALUATE TONE
Bimanual Uterine Compression and Bladder
Emptying
The basic manoeuvre of manually compressing the uterus
simultaneously through the abdomen and the vagina can
be life-saving and should be actively used until the phar-
macologic agents take effect  or surgical intervention is
initiated. The lower uterine segment must be cleared ofclots to allow the uterus to contract. Catheterization
should be an initial step in management of PPH as a full
bladder can impair the uterus ’ability to contract.Special Agents
Misoprostol
PG E1is available in 100 and 200 mg tablets and can be given
sublingually  orally  buccally  vaginally  and rectally. However 
an understanding of the pharmacokinetics of misoprostol 
borne out in clinical trials  will quickly eliminate most of
these routes for treatment of PPH52(Table 4 ).
The 2018 Cochrane review of all uterotonic agents found
misoprostol alone was superior to placebo but inferior to
oxytocin for preventing PPH; however  adding miso-
prostol to oxytocin prevented the need for additionaluterotonics.
47 53When used as an adjunctive treatment 
misoprostol should be given sublingually as this route
offers the highest bioavailability with a rapid onset and a
moderate duration of action. Doses above 400 mg are not
needed  and  in fact  200 mg may be suf ﬁcient.54Miso-
prostol should not be given rectally as this route offers the
lowest bioavailability and is associated with a maximum
serum concentration that may not reach clinically signi ﬁ-
cant levels.52 55While misoprostol is a valuable adjunct to
both prophylactic and therapeutic uterotonics  the inject-
able agents (oxytocin  ergometrine  carboprost  and TXA)
have a more rapid onset and may be more useful as an
independent agent in active PPH. The main side effects of
misoprostol  which are dose dependent  are shivering and
fever  nausea  vomiting  and diarrhea.
Tranexamic Acid
TXA is an anti ﬁbrinolytic agent that inhibits the activation
of plasminogen to plasmin. Given intravenously  it has a
half-life of 2 hours.56Side effects include nausea  vomiting 
diarrhea  seizures  deep vein thrombosis  and pulmonary
embolism  though seizures and thrombosis have not been
demonstrated in clinical trials of PPH.57Two separate
randomized trials showed prophylactic IV TXA (after cord
clamping in 1 trial  and preoperatively in the other)Table 4. Pharmacokinetics of misoprostol
AUC rankaOnset of action bmin Tmax cmin Cmax dpg/mL (averaged) Duration of action eh
Sublingual 1 11 30 500 3
Vaginal 2 20 75 300 4
Oral 3 8 30 300 2
Buccal 4 20 75 200 4
Rectal 5 100 75 100 4
aAUC: area under the (concentration vs time) curve; re ﬂects bioavailability from highest (1) to lowest (5)
bHow rapidly clinical effect is seen.
cTmax: how rapidly the drug is completely absorbed.
dHow completely the drug is absorbed.
eHow long clinical effect is seen.
1300 lDECEMBER JOGC DÉCEMBRE 2022SOGC CLINICAL PRACTICE GUIDELINE
Downloaded for Anonymous User (n/a) at University of the Andes from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on August 19  
2023. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2023. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
###9###reduced the blood loss at CD 58 59and 2 separate large
meta-analyses  as well as one randomized controlled trial
showed that 1g of IV TXA given in the setting of ongoing
PPH after vaginal delivery decreases blood loss  rate of
hysterectomy  and mortality.60e62In particular  when given
over 30e60 seconds  there was no difference in systolic or
diastolic blood pressures compared with placebo.61TXA
should be given whenever a second-line uterotonic is
administered. Every 15-minute delay results in a 10%
reduction of TXA ef ﬁcacy and immediate treatment im-
proves survival by over 70% ( P<0.0001).63Prophylactic
use (in addition to a prophylactic uterotonic agent) in in-dividuals at high risk of PPH (cesarean or vaginal delivery)
is a reasonable option. For a summary of special agents 
seeTable 5 .
Uterotonics for Treatment of Postpartum
Hemorrhage
Additional agents should be used whenever the initial
agent has not produced suf ﬁcient uterine tone by 4 mi-
nutes  or concurrently with a prophylactic agent in patients
with increased risk for PPH based on the ongoing
checklist ( Table 6 ).
Ergometrine
Ergometrine  or ergonovine is an ergot alkaloid which directly
stimulates uterine and vascular smooth muscle to contract. It
can be given intramuscularly or  in life-saving circumstances as a slow IV injection.
64It is a potent uterotonic  but in the
setting of anemia and hypovolemia  ergometrine can rarelyprecipitate coronary artery vasospasm and myocardial
ischemia  even in patients without pre-existing cardiovascular
risk factors.65Ergometrine should not be used in patients
with essential or gestational hypertension 66or in patients on
HIV protease inhibitors.47 67 68Though undisputedly
extremely effective  potential adverse effects limit ergome-
trine to a second-line agent.
Carboprost
Carboprost is a prostaglandin F 2athat causes contractions
in myometrial and intestinal smooth muscle cells.69It can
be given by intramuscular or intramyometrial injection butcannot be given intravenously. Its ef ﬁcacy is equivalent to
oxytocin after either cesarean or vaginal delivery but
common adverse effects  including nausea  vomiting 
diarrhea  and fever limit its use to a second-line agent.
34 70
Loperamide should be given concurrently with carboprost
to counteract its diarrheal effects. As a member of the F
class of prostaglandins  carboprost can cause broncho-
spasm and should not be used in patients with asthma.71
Mechanical Options
Tamponade
Intrauterine compression may control mild to moderate
blood loss. The Bakri balloon was designed for this pur-
pose and its use prevents the need for further non-
pharmacologic intervention in 75% e95% of cases.72 73It
should be ﬁlled with 300 e500 mL of sterile solution  left
in situ for 8 e48 hours and then gradually de ﬂated. Anti-
biotics should be considered if they have not already beenTable 5. Special agents
Misoprostol (Cytotec) Tranexamic acid (TXA)
Indication /C15Adjunct for prophylaxis with ﬁrst-line agents in
high-risk patients
/C15Adjunct for treatment with second-line uterotonics
in all patients with active PPH/C15Adjunct for prophylaxis with ﬁrst-line agents in very high-
risk patients
/C15Adjunct for treatment with second-line uterotonics in
all patients with active PPH
Mechanism of action Uterotonic; binds prostaglandin receptors Anti ﬁbrinolytic; inhibits activation of plasminogen to plasmin
Dose/route/rate /C15200e400mg sublingual
/C15200e400mg oral1 g IV over 30 e60 s
Onset of action /C1511 min (sublingual)
/C158 min (oral)
o both peak at 30 mind
Half-life /C152 h (sublingual)
/C151.5 h (oral)2h
Duration of action /C153 h (sublingual)
/C152 h (oral)d
Repeat dosing d Every 30 min; max 2 doses
Adverse effects /C15Fever (especially with doses /C21600mg)
/C15Shivering  nausea/vomiting  diarrheaNausea/vomitingdiarrhea  Headache
Caution d VTE has not been seen in obstetrical clinical trials
IV: intravenous; PPH: postpartum hemorrhage; VTE: venous thromboembolism.
DECEMBER JOGC DÉCEMBRE 2022 l1301PPH and Hemorrhagic Shock
Downloaded for Anonymous User (n/a) at University of the Andes from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on August 19  
2023. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2023. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
###10###given  and a pack can be placed in the vagina if the balloon
is hourglassing through the cervix. If a Bakri balloon is not
available  any balloon device can be used. Alternatively 
systematically packing the uterus from cornua to cornua
with laparotomy packs tied end to end may be considered;
however  this procedure requires more experience  more
anaesthesia  and a second procedure to remove. It may
also mask blood loss and increase the risk of infection.
Packing should be used as a last resort until more de ﬁni-
tive treatment can be initiated. A running record of
accumulated quantitative blood loss and interventions
should be easily accessible and visible to all members of
the care team ( Appendix E  F  H  I ).
RE-EVALUATE SOURCE
Retained Placenta
Retained placenta occurs in 1% e3% of vaginal deliveries
and is the second leading cause of PPH.74Risk factors are
uterine atony  an adherent placenta  succenturiate lobe  and
a trapped placenta behind a closed cervix. Internationally 
recommendations for manual removal of the placenta varybetween 30 and 60 minutes  based on studies from the
1990s showing no increase in PPH until at least 30 minutes
had passed.
74The majority of placentas (95%) will deliver
spontaneously by 18 minutes. A 2012 randomized
controlled trial con ﬁrmed a previous observational study
that found patients who had manual removal of the
placenta earlier than 30 minutes had less blood loss.75
Similarly  a large retrospective study (n >28 000) showedwaiting more than 30 minutes for placental separation
increased the risk of blood transfusion more than three-
fold.76More studies need to be done to be able to
recommend the ideal time for manual removal of the
placenta in a stable patient.
Intraumbilical oxytocin (20 IU in 30 mL saline)  miso-
prostol (800 mg in 30 mL saline)  or ergometrine (0.2 mg in
30 mL saline)  as well as IV carbetocin (100 mg)  or sub-
lingual misoprostol (400 mg) all have similar ef ﬁcacy for
expelling the placenta within 30 minutes of administration
(62%e72%).77 78In the presence of heavy bleeding 
transfer to an operating room for manual removal of the
placenta should be expedited and curettage with a large
curette may be needed. There is insuf ﬁcient evidence to
recommend routine treatment with antibiotics.74
Lacerations
Lacerations of the vagina or cervix  or disruption of a
uterine scar should be ruled out by a formal examination
under anaesthesia  and surgical repair of the injury should
be completed. Vaginal packing may be required when
generalized bleeding from a deep venous plexus pre-
cludes proper repair. Re-opening the abdominal incision
after CD to look for surgical bleeding should not be
delayed.
Uterine Inversion
This rare but potentially life-threatening condition is
thought to be caused by excessive cord traction on aTable 6. Second-line uterotonics for treatment of postpartum hemorrhage
Ergometrine/ergonovine Carboprost (Hemabate  PGF 2a)
Mechanism of action Uterotonic; non-speci ﬁc activation of adrenergic and
dopaminergic receptors in uterine and vascular
smooth muscleUterotonic; binds prostaglandin receptors
Dose and route /C15250mg IM (preferred)
/C15250mg IV over 1 min (only in life-saving circumstances)250mg IM or IMM
Onset of action /C152e5 min (IM)
/C151e2 min (IV)5 min
Half-life /C15T1/2a¼10 mina
/C15T1/2b¼2hb30 min
Duration of action 120 min 60 min
Repeat dosing Every 2 h  max 5 doses Every 15 min  max 5 doses
Adverse effects Nausea/vomiting  hypertension  vasoconstriction causing ST
depression and chest painDiarrhea
Caution /C15Hypertension
/C15HIV medications (NNRTIs or protease inhibitors)
/C15Macrolide antibioticsCan cause bronchospasm in patients
with asthma
aT1/2a¼time for the drug to redistribute to other tissues;
bT1/2b¼time for the drug to re-enter and then be cleared from the circulation
IM: intramuscular; IMM: intramyometrial; IV: intravenous; NNRTI: non-nucleoside reverse transcriptase inhibitors; PGF 2a: prostaglandin F 2a.
1302 lDECEMBER JOGC DÉCEMBRE 2022SOGC CLINICAL PRACTICE GUIDELINE
Downloaded for Anonymous User (n/a) at University of the Andes from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on August 19  
2023. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2023. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
###11###fundal placenta or fundal pressure without a uterine
contraction; however  there are no risk factors in most
cases.79Clinical diagnosis is based on the presence of brisk
vaginal bleeding  a mass in the vagina  and vasovagal
syncope. If still attached  the placenta should not be
removed prior to reversion. Prompt replacement may be
attempted; however  hypovolemic shock occurs rapidly 
and the patient should be urgently transferred to an
operating room if reversion cannot be accomplishedimmediately. Uterine relaxation with IV nitroglycerine in
addition to vasopressors may be required to revert the
uterus and reverse hemodynamic instability. If reversion is
unsuccessful  laparotomy may be required. Antibiotics and
oxytocin should be given after reversion.
REACT
If previous measures fail to control bleeding  urgent
abdominal surgical exploration is required. Bimanual
compression should be continued while preparations in
the operating room are being made and surgery is about to
begin. Uterine compression sutures (B-Lynch  Cho) uterine artery ligation  internal iliac artery ligation  embo-
lization  and hysterectomy are possible interventions. This
guideline is not an instruction manual for those not skilled
at performing these procedures. Additional expertise
should be sought urgently if the necessary procedure is
beyond the skill set of the care provider.
Compression Sutures
The B-Lynch technique uses an absorbable suture on a
large needle to create compression “suspenders  ”which
successfully treat intractable uterine atony 75% of the
time.
80Adding a second suture can further decrease the
need for hysterectomy.81Cho square compression sutures 
incorporating both anterior and posterior walls of the
uterus  have similar ef ﬁcacy.82
Uterine Artery Ligation
The purpose of uterine artery ligation is not to obliterate
blood ﬂow to the uterus  but to temporarily slow it. Key
aspects include bladder retraction (to prevent traction on
both bladder and ureters caused by the suture) and use of
an absorbable suture on a large needle to secure the uterine
artery at the level of the isthmus (or 2 e3 cm below the
uterine incision at CD). Ensuring 2 cm of myometrium isincorporated into the suture will bundle the uterine artery
and vein and prevent complete occlusion of the uterine
artery. A second suture can be used superiorly to further
compress ascending branches of the uterine artery. Alter-
natively  if bleeding is predominantly coming from thelower uterine segment or cervical branches  a second stitch
placed 3 cm inferior to the ﬁrst can be used to compress
descending branches of the uterine artery. This location
increases the risk of ureteric entrapment  and further
bladder dissection should be performed. Radiologic or
cystoscopic evaluation of ureteral patency is recommended.
Bilateral Internal Iliac Artery Ligation
Bilateral internal iliac artery ligation is extremely effective
at controlling obstetrical hemorrhage (including followinghysterectomy)  with numerous case series reporting suc-
cess rates of 75% or higher.
83e85Unfortunately  bilateral
internal iliac artery ligation requires more skill and expe-
rience. Retroperitoneal dissection to identify the bifurca-
tion of the common iliac artery is followed by ligation of
the internal branch at least 2 cm distal to the bifurcation
with an absorbable suture. Bilateral internal iliac artery
ligation reduces pelvic blood ﬂow by 49% but immediate
increased retrograde ﬂow in collateral vessels prevents
pelvic ischemia. Resumption of menses and demonstration
ofﬂow in distal uterine arteries in 90% of women within 6
months suggests that fertility is preserved.86
Uterine or Internal Iliac Artery Embolization
Embolization of either uterine or internal iliac arteries is
highly effective and fertility sparing. When compared with
hysterectomy  blood loss and operative time are
signiﬁcantly less.87 88The main drawbacks of embolization
are the availability of an interventional radiology
department and a patient with a stable blood pressure. If
these conditions are met and bleeding is ongoing  uterineartery embolization can be considered before proceeding
to hysterectomy. Uterine artery embolization can also be
considered post-hysterectomy for ongoing bleeding 
where a contributing vessel can be identi ﬁed. Uterine
artery embolization is particularly useful for cases
where bleeding is expected to be high and/or surgical
treatment is expected to be dif ﬁcult (e.g.  placenta previa 
accreta  severe obesity  or suspected intra-abdominal
adhesions). In these cases  an interventional radiology
consult should be obtained pre-delivery and a plan
established  including the possibility of pre-deliveryplacement of arterial balloons.
Hysterectomy
In cases of massive obstetric hemorrhage  hysterectomy
can be life-saving  and the biggest risk is waiting too long
to perform it. Successive clamping of pedicles without
tying them until the uterine arteries have been secured will
allow faster control of bleeding. Con ﬂicting opinions on
subtotal versus total hysterectomy preclude a
DECEMBER JOGC DÉCEMBRE 2022 l1303PPH and Hemorrhagic Shock
Downloaded for Anonymous User (n/a) at University of the Andes from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on August 19  
2023. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2023. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
###12###recommendation  and clinical judgment on the source of
bleeding and type of hysterectomy is required.89
Abdominal Packing
When surgical hemostasis has been achieved  but ongoing
bleeding persists  disseminated intravascular coagulation acidosis  and hypothermia are often contributing factors.
Packing the pelvis tightly with warm  moist packs and
leaving them in place for 24 e48 hours can provide the
necessary time to reverse these factors.
RESUSCITATE
Resuscitation requires ongoing communication andteamwork involving the obstetrical care provider and
anaesthesia and nursing teams. An algorithm  including
clinical signs and symptoms of PPH and hypovolemic
shock and their treatments  should clearly outline the re-
sponsibilities of various team members in order to opti-
mize maternal outcome
11(Appendix G ).
PPH is an active  ongoing process; lab results represent a
point in time that has invariably passed. While formal lab
tests can help tailor therapy  waiting for results to initiate
treatment can worsen patient outcomes.90Most parturi-
ents are able to maintain hemodynamic stability despite
considerable blood loss. The recommended hemoglobin
level at which to transfuse has decreased over time. In
2003  the threshold was 80 g/L  and as of 2021 theconsensus is 70 g/L; however  with many patients able to
tolerate hemoglobin as low as 50 g/L  this threshold may
change in the future. Patients with pre-existing anemia
may tolerate lower hemoglobin levels better than those
with acute anemia. Current recommendations suggest
that vital sign changes and accurate measurements of
ongoing blood loss should trigger resuscitation efforts.
Escalation of care (with or without transfusion) should
occur at blood loss intervals of 500  1000  and 1500 mL
(mild/moderate/severe blood loss) so the team can
respond appropriately if the patient is not tolerating theblood loss.
Maximum allowable blood loss (MABL)
91is an invaluable
tool to customize treatment of PPH and should be
calculated for each individual patient and documented on
the risk assessment form. This formula uses the patient ’s
most recent hemoglobin level as the initial hemoglobin
(Hbi) and the hemoglobin at which transfusion may occur 
if clinically indicated  as the ﬁnal hemoglobin (Hb f); it in-
corporates the patient ’s weight and total circulating blood
volume and provides an individualized estimate of the
patient ’s tolerable blood loss before transfusion shouldoccur. The equation assumes that volume losses have been
replaced with balanced crystalloid. In a healthy pregnancy 
the total circulating blood volume is 100 mL/kg (range
90e200 mL/kg.) In obesity  or volume-contracted states
such as severe preeclampsia  total blood volume should be
estimated at 70 mL/kg.92
The actual calculation is:
ðHbi-HbfÞ/C2Pt’s Weight ðkgÞ/C2Total Blood Volume ðmL=kgÞ
½ðHbiþHbfÞ/C20:5/C138
The following simpli ﬁed and more user-friendly version of
this formula can be used to calculate MABL:
MABL ¼WtðkgÞ/C2100/C2½Hbi-70/C138
ðHbiþ70Þ/C20:5
Hypotension  tachycardia  oliguria  and altered mental
status indicate hypovolemic shock and should be treatedaggressively. The “lethal triad ”of coagulopathy  acidosis 
and hypothermia  which occurs in hemorrhagic shock 
compounds the loss of volume and blood components.
8
(Appendix J )
Initial Steps
Establish the following:
/C15Two large bore IV catheters
/C15Frequent BP monitoring (consider arterial line)
/C15Continuous EKG
/C15O2saturation monitor
/C15Temperature probe
/C15Foley catheter
Oxygen  Temperature  Volume
Oxygen supplementation of 8 e10 L/min will slow the
onset of tissue hypoxia. Hypothermia increases the risk of
mortality; keeping the patient dry  using warmed blankets
or forced air warmers  and warming all ﬂuids will help
maintain euthermia.93Initial volume resuscitation should
use Ringer ’s lactate in a ratio of 1 e2 mL per 1 mL blood
loss.94Higher volumes of crystalloid have been
associated with poor maternal outcomes due to dilutional
coagulopathy. At this time  there is no evidence to promote
the use of colloids over crystalloids  as colloids are also
associated with impaired coagulation. In the setting of
ongoing massive hemorrhage  red blood cell (RBC)
administration should occur before total blood loss equals
MABL.
1304 lDECEMBER JOGC DÉCEMBRE 2022SOGC CLINICAL PRACTICE GUIDELINE
Downloaded for Anonymous User (n/a) at University of the Andes from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on August 19  
2023. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2023. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
###13###Blood Products
Red Blood CellsRBCs are the ﬁrst step in the transfusion process  unless
the patient has a known coagulation defect. Transfusing
RBCs is not without risk  and ongoing transfusion medi-
cine trials continue to demonstrate that the decision to
transfuse must take into account the potential for harm.
92
Patients at high risk for PPH should have a blood type andscreening on admission to cross match blood  if needed. O
negative  Kell negative emergency blood is the next best
alternative to cross-matched blood. There is no absolutehemoglobin level at which transfusion must occur  but
maintaining a level between 70 and 90 g/L during active
hemorrhage is recommended.
95
Transfusion should occur when hemorrhage is unre-
sponsive to uterotonic measures and blood loss exceeds
150 mL/min ortotal loss is rapidly approaching the
calculated MABL orwhen the patient develops symptoms
of inadequate perfusion  such as shortness of breath or
tachycardia unresponsive to ﬂuid in the presence of he-
moglobin less than 90 g/L.
Fatigue alone is not a symptom that warrants trans-
fusion.96Each unit of packed RBCs should increase the
hemoglobin by 10 g/L. If 4 units of RBCs have been
given  and blood loss is ongoing  activation of a MHP
should be considered. Hemorrhage caused by uterine
atony or birth-related trauma rarely requires additional
coagulation factors or platelets  unless the volume of blood
loss is signi ﬁcantly greater than the MABL and/or dilu-
tional coagulopathy occurs. Hemorrhage due to placental
abruption  amniotic ﬂuid embolism  or disseminated
intravascular coagulation consumes platelets and factors
rapidly and replacement may be bene ﬁcial earlier in
resuscitation.97Cell salvage does not increase the risk of
amniotic ﬂuid embolism and should be considered when
the risk for severe PPH is high.19Intravenous iron is an
important adjuvant for a hemoglobin level <80 g/L once
bleeding has settled.16 98 99
Platelets
Platelet transfusion is necessary if blood loss is severe or if
a consumptive coagulopathy develops. During active
hemorrhage  platelets should be transfused at a level
of 75 /C2109/L in order to maintain a level above
50/C2109/L.19There is no evidence to support a ﬁxed ratio
of platelets in obstetric hemorrhage; however  it is
acceptable to give 1 pooled dose of adult platelets
(4 U platelets  or 5 U in Québec) per 8 e10 U of RBCs 
transfused in the absence of lab data and with ongoinghemorrhage.100Each dose should raise the platelet count
by 15e25/C2109/L.
Fresh Frozen Plasma
The goal of transfusion is to keep the INR <1.8. Donor
plasma has less ﬁbrinogen than the 5 g/L typically seen in
the plasma of healthy parturients and is not the ﬁrst choice
for its replacement.19Although plasma provides additional
clotting factors  most healthy women with moderate ob-stetric hemorrhage do not require these factors. However 
using plasma in a ratio to RBCs of 1:2 or 1:1  as a global
replacement  may improve outcomes in severe hemor-
rhage in trauma patients  particularly if timely lab values
are not available. Large volumes of plasma increase the
incidence of transfusion-related acute lung injury (TRALI)
and transfusion-associated cardiorespiratory overload
(TACO).
101
Fibrinogen
Fibrinogen levels <2 g/L are associated with poor out-
comes and direct replacement below these levels is rec-
ommended. Testing for ﬁbrinogen levels when blood loss
is<1500 mL is not predictive of severe PPH  and routine
administration of ﬁbrinogen in the absence of hypo ﬁ-
brinogenemia does not improve outcomes. Levels will
drop more rapidly in the setting of abruption and amniotic
ﬂuid embolism than in the setting of atony.94 96 97
Each unit of cryoprecipitate contains 150 e350 mg of
ﬁbrinogen and a typical dose is 8 e10 U. Thawing is
required prior to use  and multiple donors are required for
sufﬁcient amounts  which increases the risk of transfusion
reactions.102 103
Fibrinogen concentrates (RiaSTAP and FIBRYGA) do not
require thawing  provide accurate dosing  and decrease
both the requirement for other blood products and the
incidence of circulatory overload.104Fibrinogen concen-
trates also undergo viral inactivation and removal of an-
tigens and antibodies. Four grams of ﬁbrinogen
concentrate is equivalent to 10 units of cryoprecipitate and
typically raises plasma ﬁbrinogen levels by 1 g/L (60 mg/
kg dosing).102 103
Massive Hemorrhage Protocol
Originally designed for trauma patients  MHP is now often
used in the setting of obstetrical hemorrhage. In the
trauma literature  transfusing ﬁxed ratios of RBCs to fresh
frozen plasma to platelets of either 1:1:1 or 2:1:1 after theﬁrst 4 units of packed RBCs has been shown to decrease
mortality.
94 96 97 105 106Therapy based on lab values
DECEMBER JOGC DÉCEMBRE 2022 l1305PPH and Hemorrhagic Shock
Downloaded for Anonymous User (n/a) at University of the Andes from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on August 19  
2023. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2023. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
###14###(including viscoelastography  where available [rotational
thromboelastometry  thromboelastography]) is superior to
ratio-based approaches as it reduces the number of
products transfused  reduces transfusion overload and
transfusion-related complications  and tailors therapy to
the underlying coagulopathy.107 108
The amount of blood loss that should trigger an MHP can
be markedly different based on the patient ’s size  etiology
of hemorrhage  and underlying health issues (i.e.  pre-
eclampsia). Using a single blood loss volume to initiate an
MHP may result in some patients being transfused too
early and others too late. Whenever the blood loss is
approaching the MABL and there is ongoing bleeding 
RBCs should be considered ﬁrst.94 96 97 105 106Canadian
standard of care recommendations indicate that an MHP
should be able to be mobilized and products delivered
within 10 minutes.109If local resources cannot reliably
meet this timeline  consider initiating an MHP sooner.
If the patient is stable and the bleeding is controlled after
the initial 4 units of RBCs  the MHP products can be
returned.
Coagulopathy does not occur in every PPH including
massive PPH. When there is no coagulopathy  there is no
beneﬁt to transfusion of coagulation products. The etiology
of the bleed matters  as atony and trauma are less likely to
require coagulation factor replacement than abruption 
abnormal placentation  or amniotic ﬂuid embolism. Testing
for coagulopathy rarely demonstrates abnormalities when
the blood loss is <1.5e2 L. When coagulopathy is present
in PPH  hypo ﬁbrinogenemia is the most common etiol-
ogy 102 103and commonly coexists with hypocalcemia.
Ionized calcium less than 1.16 mmol/L (rather than routine
or corrected calcium which may be normal) is the most
accurate way to measure calcium status in a hemorrhaging
patient and may be at least as important as ﬁbrinogen in
terms of risk reduction.110Calcium chloride is the agent of
choice to replace calcium as it contains 3 times the
elemental calcium of calcium gluconate and does not
require liver metabolism. Fresh frozen plasma and platelets
are less commonly needed  but may be included in the
MHP   particularly after 4 to 8 units of RBCs  respectively.
Frequent monitoring of all these components (CBC  PTT 
INR  ﬁbrinogen  ionized calcium)  as well as magnesium 
electrolytes  hypothermia  and overall volume status are
necessary components of any MHP . Tailoring therapy as
early as feasible results in a patient-centred approach that isin keeping with the most up-to-date recommendations in
transfusion medicine.Prothrombin Complex Concentrate
Prothrombin complex concentrate contains vitamin
Kedependent clotting factors and is indicated for reversal
of vitamin K antagonists (warfarin). Apart from patients
with known factor II or X de ﬁciencies  in which case  a
hematologist should be consulted  there is currently no
role for prothrombin complex concentrate in the treat-
ment of PPH.
96 97 105
Recombinant Activated Factor VII
Recombinant activated factor VII (rFVIIa) provides a
thrombin burst and stabilizes clots  and should only be
administered to patients with a ﬁbrinogen level >1g/L 
platelets >20/C2109/L  and a near normal pH (7.4) and
temperature (35.9/C14C). Given the absence of strong evi-
dence of bene ﬁt and the serious risk of thrombosis  rFVIIa
should only be used in PPH as a last resort and in
consultation with a transfusion medicine specialist or
hematologist.96 97 105
REVIEW
Quality care initiatives in many centres have clearly shown
that strong teamwork and communication  along with
simulation training and debrie ﬁng after any signi ﬁcant
PPH  improve outcomes. Key components of teamwork
include a process for standard and structured communi-
cation  effective use of clear language  psychological safetywhere team members are not fearful of speaking up 
situational awareness  and effective leadership
111
(Appendix K ).
Debrie ﬁng after simulation led by a trained facilitator
promotes improved learning outcomes and enhances
future performance in the clinical setting.112Debrie ﬁng is
more than feedback  it is “an interactive  bidirectional and
reﬂective conversation  ”113which will foster better
communication and teamwork in subsequent clinical sce-
narios. As experiencing PPH can be traumatic  care pro-viders should have a conversation with the patient and
their family to explain the events and answer any questions
they have. Debrie ﬁng after a signi ﬁcant PPH should occur
and should include all involved members of the health care
team  as well as a separate discussion with the patient and
her family.
CONCLUSION
Although the acute treatment of PPH is key for any single
patient  the ongoing review practices is most important for
1306 lDECEMBER JOGC DÉCEMBRE 2022SOGC CLINICAL PRACTICE GUIDELINE
Downloaded for Anonymous User (n/a) at University of the Andes from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on August 19  
2023. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2023. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
###15###future patients. While standardized approaches for the
identi ﬁcation and management of PPH may need to vary
between sites based on the availability of resources  best
practices include:
/C15a risk assessment for every patient  including calculation
of the MABL
/C15a standardized approach for collecting  weighing  and
reporting blood loss
/C15stage-based management strategies  including protocols
speciﬁcally designed for massive blood loss
/C15‘hemorrhage carts ’for storing medications and supplies
/C15regular multidisciplinary staff training and simulation
/C15debrie ﬁng with formal review of adverse events.
Templates for all these recommendations can be found in
the supplementary toolkit.
SUPPLEMENTARY TOOLKIT
A supplementary toolkit related to this article can befound in the Online Appendix .
REFERENCES
1.Grobman WA  Bailit JL  Rice MM  et al. Frequency of and factors
associated with severe maternal morbidity. Obstet Gynecol2014;123:804 e10.
2.Deneux-Tharaux C  Bonnet MP   Tort J. Épidémiologie de l ’hémorragie du
post-partum [Epidemiology of post-partum haemorrhage]. J GynecolObstet Biol Reprod (Paris) 2014;43:936 e50.
3.Mehrabadi A  Liu S  Bartholomew S  et al. Temporal trends in postpartum
hemorrhage and severe postpartum hemorrhage in Canada from 2003 to
2010. J Obstet Gynaecol Can 2014;36:21 e33.
4.Knight M  Callaghan WM  Berg C  et al. Trends in postpartum hemorrhage
in high resource countries: a review and recommendations from theInternational Postpartum Hemorrhage Collaborative Group. BMCPregnancy Childbirth 2009;9:55 .
5.Al Kadri HM  Al Anazi BK  Tamim HM. Visual estimation versus
gravimetric measurement of postpartum blood loss: a prospective cohortstudy. Arch Gynecol Obstet 2011;283:1207 e13.
6.Patel A  Goudar SS  Geller SE  et al. Drape estimation vs. visual
assessment for estimating postpartum hemorrhage [published erratumappears in Int J Gynaecol Obstet 2006;95:312]. Int J Gynaecol Obstet2006;93:220 e4.
7.Della Torre M  Kilpatrick SJ  Hibbard JU  et al. Assessing preventability for
obstetric hemorrhage. Am J Perinatol 2011;28:753 e60.
8.Seacrist MJ  VanOtterloo LR  Morton CH  et al. Quality improvement
opportunities identi ﬁed through case review of pregnancy-related deaths
from obstetric hemorrhage. J Obstet Gynecol Neonatal Nurs
2019;48:288 e99.
9.Rubenstein AF  Zamudio S  Al-Khan A  et al. Clinical experience with the
implementation of accurate measurement of blood loss during cesareandelivery: in ﬂuences on hemorrhage recognition and allogeneic transfusion.
Am J Perinatol 2018;35:655 e9.10.Kramer MS  Berg C  Abenhaim H  et al. Incidence  risk factors and
temporal trends in severe postpartum hemorrhage. Am J Obstet Gynecol
2013;209:449.e1 e7.
11. California Maternal Quality Care Collaborative. Obstetric hemorrhage.
Available at: https://www.cmqcc.org/content/obstetric-hemorrhage-0 .
Accessed on June 1  2021.
12.Kavle JA  Stoltzfus RJ  Witter F  et al. Association between anaemia during
pregnancy and blood loss at and after delivery among women with vaginalbirths in Pemba Island  Zanzibar  Tanzania. J Health Popul Nutr
2008;26:232 e40.
13.Dziegala M  Josiak K  Kasztura M  et al. Iron de ﬁciency as energetic insult
to skeletal muscle in chronic diseases. J Cachexia Sarcopenia Muscle2018;9:802 e15.
14.Mawani M  Ali SA  Bano G  et al. Iron de ﬁciency anemia among women of
reproductive age  an important public health problem: situation analysis.Reprod Syst Sex Disord 2016;5:187 .
15.Tang G  Lausman A  Abdulrehman J  et al. Prevalence of iron de ﬁciency
and iron de ﬁ
ciency anemia during pregnancy: a single centre Canadian
study. Blood 2019;134(Suppl 1):3389 .
16.Munoz M  Pena-Rosas J  Robinson S  et al. Patient blood management in
obstetrics: management of anaemia and hematinic de ﬁciencies in pregnancy
and in the post-partum period: NATA consensus statement. Transfus Med2018;28:22 e39.
17.Li N  Zhao G  Wu W   et al. The ef ﬁcacy and safety of vitamin c for
iron supplementation in adult patients with irondeﬁciency anemia: a randomized clinical trial. JAMA Netw Open 2020;3:
e2023644 .
18.Pavord S  Daru J  Prasannan N  et al. UK guidelines on the management of
iron de ﬁciency in pregnancy. Br J Haematol 2020;188:819 e30.
19.Munoz M  Stensballe J  Bucloy-Bouthors A-S  et al. Patient blood
management in obstetrics: prevention and treatment of postpartumhaemorrhage. A NATA consensus statement. Blood Transfus2019;17:112 e36.
20.Khalafallah AA  Dennis AE  Ogden K  et al. Three-year follow-up of a
randomised clinical trial of intravenous versus oral iron for anaemia inpregnancy. BMJ Open 2012;2:e000998 .
21. Cooper S. Alberta Health Services. PPH staging and management guidelines.
Available at: https://extranet.ahsnet.ca/teams/policydocuments/1/klink/et-
klink-ckv-post-partum-hemorrhage-adult-inpatient.pdf . Accessed on June 1 
2021.
22.Leduc D  Senikas V   Lalonde A. Active management of the third stage of
labour: prevention and treatment of post partum hemorrhage. J ObstetGynaecol Can 2018;40:e841 e55.
23.Delayed Umbilical Cord Clamping After Birth: ACOG Committee
Opinion  Number 814. Obstet Gynecol 2020;136:e100 e6.
24.Hana ﬁS  El-Shehawy H  Meshmesh K. Impact of controlled cord traction
in the management of the third stage of labor on postpartum hemorrhage:
a randomized controlled trial. EBWHJ 2014;4:78 e81.
25.Hofmeyr GJ  Mshweshwe NT  Gülmezoglu AM. Controlled cord traction
for the third stage of labour. Cochrane Database Syst Rev2015;1:CD008020 .
26.Gülmezoglu AM  Lumbiganon P   Landoulsi S  et al. Active
management of the third stage of labour with and without controlledcord traction: a randomised  controlled  non-inferiority trial. Lancet
2012;379:1721 e7.
27.Bartlett L  Cantor D  Lynam P   et al. Facility-based active management of
the third stage of labour: assessment of quality in six countries in sub-Saharan Africa. Bull World Health Organ 2015;93:759 e67.
28.Althabe F  Alemán A  Tomasso G  et al. A pilot randomized controlled trial
of controlled cord traction to reduce postpartum blood loss. Int J GynaecolObstet 2009;107:4 e7.
29.Begley CM  Gyte GML  Devane D  et al. Active versus expectant
management for women in the third stage of labour. Cochrane Database
Syst Rev 2019;(2):CD007412 .
DECEMBER JOGC DÉCEMBRE 2022
l1307PPH and Hemorrhagic Shock
Downloaded for Anonymous User (n/a) at University of the Andes from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on August 19  
2023. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2023. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
###16###30.Karimi FZ  Heidarian Miri H  Salehian M  et al. The effect of mother-infant
skin to skin contact after birth on third stage of labor: a systematic review
and meta-analysis. Iran J Public Health 2019;48:612 e20.
31.Tran G  Kanczuk M  Balki M. The association between the time from
oxytocin cessation during labour to Cesarean delivery and postpartumblood loss: a retrospective cohort study. Can J Anesth 2017;64:820 e7.
32.Westhoff G  Cotter AM  Tolosa JE. Prophylactic oxytocin for the third
stage of labour to prevent postpartum haemorrhage. Cochrane DatabaseSyst Rev 2013;10:CD001808 .
33.Bilgin Z  Kömürcü N. Comparison of the effects and side effects of
misoprostol and oxytocin in the postpartum period: a systematic review.
Taiwan J Obstet Gynecol 2019;58:748 e56.
34.Sunil Kumar KS  Shyam S  Batakurki P . Carboprost versus oxytocin for
active management of third stage of labor: a prospective randomizedcontrol study. J Obstet Gynaecol India 2016;66(Suppl 1):229 e34.
35.McDonald S  Abbott JM  Higgins SP . Prophylactic ergometrine-oxytocin
versus oxytocin for the third stage of labour. Cochrane Database Syst Rev2004;1:CD000201 .
36. DrugBank Online. Oxytocin pharmacokinetics. Available at: https://go.
drugbank.com/drugs/DB00107 . Accessed on June 1  2021.
37.Mangla D  Goel JK  Goel R. Prophylactic intramyometrial oxytocin before
placenta delivery during cesarean section prevents postpartum hemorrhage:a prospective randomized study of 150 women. J South Asian Feder ObstGynae 2012;4:93 e6.
38.Fernando D  Siederer S  Singh S  et al. Safety  tolerability and
pharmacokinetics of single doses of oxytocin administered via an inhaledroute in healthy females: randomized  single blind  phase 1 study. Lancet2017;22:249 e55.
39.Oladapo OT  Okusanya BO  Abalos E  et al. Intravenous versus
intramuscular prophylactic oxytocin for the third stage of labour. CochraneDatabase Syst Rev 2020;(11):CD009332 .
40.Heesen M  Carvalho B  Carvalho JCA  et al. International consensus
statement on the use of uterotonic agents during caesarean section.Anaesthesia 2019;74:1305 e19.
41.George RB  McKeen D  Chaplin AC  et al. Up-down determination of the
ED(90) of oxytocin infusions for the prevention of postpartum uterineatony in parturients undergoing Cesarean delivery. Can J Anesth
2010;57:578 e82.
42.Lavoie A  McCarthy RJ  Wong CA. The ED90 of prophylactic oxytocin
infusion after delivery of the placenta during Cesarean delivery in laboringcompared with nonlaboring women: an up-down sequential allocationdose-response study. Anesth Analg 2015;121:159 e64.
43.Lewis G  ed. Why mothers die 1997 e99. The con ﬁdential enquiry into
maternal deaths in the United Kingdom. London (UK): RCOG Press; 2001 .
44.Farina Z  Fawcus S. Oxytocin eensuring appropriate use and balancing
efﬁcacy with safety. S Afr Med J 2015;105:271 e4.
45.Svanström MC  Biber B  Hanes M  et al. Signs of myocardial ischaemia
after injection of oxytocin: a randomized double-blind comparison of
oxytocin and methylergometrine during Caesarean section. Br J Anaesth2008;100:683 e9.
46.Mörtl MG  Friedrich S  Kraschl J  et al. Haemodynamic effects of
carbetocin and oxytocin given as intravenous bolus on women undergoing
caesarean delivery: a randomised trial. Int J Obstet Gynaecol2011;118:1349 e56.
47.Gallos ID  Papadopoulou A  Man R  et al. Uterotonic agents for preventing
postpartum haemorrhage: a network meta-analysis. Cochrane Database
Syst Rev 2018;12:CD011689 .
48.Khan M  Balki M  Ahmed I  et al. Carbetocin at elective Cesarean delivery:
a sequential allocation trial to determine the minimum effective dose. Can JAnaesth 2014;61:242 e8.
49.Nucci B  Aya A  Aubry E  et al. Carbetocin for prevention of postcesarean
hemorrhage in women with severe preeclampsia: a before-after cohortcomparison with oxytocin. J Clin Anesth 2016;35:321 e5.50.Reyes OA  Gonzalez GM. Carbetocin versus oxytocin for prevention of
postpartum hemorrhage in patients with severe preeclampsia: a double-
blind randomized controlled trial. J Obstet Gynaecol Can2011;33:1099 e104.
51. Chao YS  McCormack S. Carbetocin for the prevention of post-partum
hemorrhage: a review of clinical effectiveness  cost-effectiveness  andguidelines. Ottawa (ON): Canadian Agency for Drugs and Technologies inHealth. Available at: https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/NBK546425/ .
Accessed on July 29  2019.
52.Tang OS  Gemzell-Danielsson K  Ho PC. Misoprostol: pharmacokinetic
proﬁles  effects on the uterus and side effects. Int J Gynecol Obstet
2007:S160 e7.
53.Chaudhuri P  Majumdar A. Sublingual misoprostol as an adjunct to
oxytocin during cesarean delivery in women at risk of postpartumhemorrhage. Int J Gynaecol Obstet 2015;128:48 e52.
54.Ugwu IA  Oluwasola TA  Enabor OO  et al. Randomized controlled
trial comparing 200
mg and 400 mg sublingual misoprostol for prevention
of primary postpartum hemorrhage. Int J Gynaecol Obstet
2016;133:173 e7.
55.Barbieri R. Stop using rectal misoprostol for the treatment of
postpartum hemorrhage caused by uterine atony. OBG Manag 2016;28.8-10 12 .
56. Pharmacokinetics of tranexamic acid. Available at: https://go.drugbank.
com/drugs/DB00302 . Accessed on June 1  2021.
57. Chauncey J  Wieters J. Tranexamic acid - Stat Pearls. Available at: https://
www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/NBK532909/ . Accessed on June 1  2021.
58.Della Corte L  Saccone G  Locci M  et al. Tranexamic acid for treatment of
primary postpartum hemorrhage after vaginal delivery: a systematic review
and meta-analysis of randomized controlled trials. J Matern Fetal Neonatal
Med 2020;33:869 e74.
59.Ray I  Bhattacharya R  Chakraborty S  et al. Role of intravenous tranexamic
acid on cesarean section blood loss: a prospective randomized study.J Obstet Gynaecol India 2016;66(Suppl 1):347 e52.
60.Xia Y   Grif ﬁths BB  Xue Q. Tranexamic acid for postpartum hemorrhage
prevention in vaginal delivery: a meta-analysis. Medicine (Baltimore)2020;99:e18792 .
61.Sentilhes L  Senat MV   Le Lous M  et al. Tranexamic acid for the
prevention of blood loss after cesarean delivery. N Engl J Med
2021;384:1623 e34.
62.Brenner A  Shakur-Still H  Chaudhri R  et al. The impact of early outcome
events on the effect of tranexamic acid in post-partum haemorrhage: anexploratory subgroup analysis of the WOMAN trial. BMC PregnancyChildbirth 2018;18:215 .
63.Gayet-Ageron A  Prieto-Merino D  Ker K  et al. Effect of treatment delay
on the effectiveness and safety of anti ﬁbrinolytics in acute severe
haemorrhage: a meta-analysis of individual patient-level data from 40 138
bleeding patients. Lancet 2018;391:125 e32.
64. Pharmacokinetics of ergotamine. Available at: https://go.drugbank.com/
drugs/DB01253 . Accessed on June 1  2021.
65.Spencer SPE  Lowe SA. Ergometrine for postpartum hemorrhage and
associated myocardial ischemia: two case reports and a review of theliterature. Clin Case Rep 2019;7:2433 e42.
66.Liabsuetrakul T  Choobun T  Peeyananjarassri K  et al. Prophylactic use of
ergot alkaloids in the third stage of labour. Cochrane Database Syst Rev
2018;6:CD005456 .
67. Recommendations for the use of antiretroviral drugs during pregnancy and
interventions to reduce perinatal HIV transmission in the United States.Available at: https://clinicalinfo.hiv.gov/en/guidelines/perinatal/
intrapartum-antiretroviral-therapyprophylaxis . Accessed on June 1  2021.
68.Chelmow D. Postpartum haemorrhage: prevention. BMJ Clin Evid
2008;2008:1410 .
69.Bygdeman M. Pharmacokinetics of prostaglandins. Best Pract Res Clin
Obstet Gynaecol 2003;17:707 e16.
1308
lDECEMBER JOGC DÉCEMBRE 2022SOGC CLINICAL PRACTICE GUIDELINE
Downloaded for Anonymous User (n/a) at University of the Andes from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on August 19  
2023. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2023. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
###17###70.Bai J  Sun Q  Zhai H. A comparison of oxytocin and carboprost
tromethamine in the prevention of postpartum hemorrhage in high-risk
patients undergoing cesarean delivery. Exp Ther Med 2014;7:46 e50.
71. Minigh J. Carboprost - an overview. The Comprehensive Pharmacology
Reference; ScienceDirect Topics. Availableat: https://www.sciencedirect.com/
topics/nursing-and-health-professions/carboprost . Accessed on June 1  2022.
72.Likis FE  Sathe NA  Morgans AK  et al. Management of postpartum
hemorrhage. Comparative effectiveness review no. 151. AHRQpublication no. 15-EHC013-EF . Rockville (MD): Agency for Healthcare
Research and Quality; 2015 .
73.Brown H  Okeyo S  Mabeya H  et al. The Bakri tamponade balloon as an
adjunct treatment for refractory postpartum hemorrhage. Int J GynaecolObstet 2016;135:276 e80.
74.Perlman NC  Carusi DA. Retained placenta after vaginal delivery:
risk factors and management. Int J Womens Health 2019;11:527 e34.
75.Magann EF  Niederhauser A  Doherty DA  et al. Reducing hemodynamic
compromise with placental removal at 10 versus 15 mins: a randomizedclinical trial. Am J Perinatol 2012;29:609 e14.
76.Shinar S  Schwartz A  Maslovitz S  et al. How long is safe? Setting the cutoff
for uncomplicated third stage length: a retrospective case-control study.
Birth 2016;43:36 e41.
77.Maher MA  Sayyed TM  Elkhouly NI. Different routes and forms of
uterotonics for treatment of retained placenta: a randomized clinical trial.J Matern Fetal Neonatal Med 2017;30:2179 e84.
78.Harara R  Hanafy S  Zidan MS  et al. Intraumbilical injection of three
different uterotonics in the management of retained placenta. J ObstetGynaecol Res 2011;37:1203 e7.
79. Thakur M  Thakur A. Uterine inversion. Treasure Island (FL): StatPearls
Publishing. Available at: https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/NBK525
971/ . Accessed on June 1  2022.
80.Kaya B  Tuten A  Daglar K  et al. B-Lynch uterine compression sutures in
the conservative surgical management of uterine atony. Arch GynecolObstet 2015;291:1005 e14.
81.S¸ahin H  Soylu Karap ınar O  S ¸ahin EA  et al. The effectiveness of
the double B-lynch suture as a modi ﬁcation in the treatment
of intractable postpartum haemorrhage. J Obstet Gynaecol2018;38:796 e9.
82.Kwong LT  So PL  Wong SF. Uterine compression sutures with additional
hemostatic procedures for the management of postpartum hemorrhage.J Obstet Gynaecol Res 2020;46:2332 e9.
83.Joshi VM  Otiv SR  Majumder R  et al. Internal iliac artery ligation for
arresting postpartum haemorrhage. BJOG 2007;114:356 e61.
84.Wang CY   Pan HH  Chang CC  et al. Outcomes of hypogastric
artery ligation and transcatheter uterine artery embolization inwomen with postpartum hemorrhage. Taiwan J Obstet Gynecol2019;58:72 e6.
85.
Camuzcuoglu H  Toy H  Vural M  et al. Internal iliac artery ligation for
severe postpartum hemorrhage and severe hemorrhage after postpartum
hysterectomy. J Obstet Gynaecol Res 2010;36:538 e43.
86.Singh A  Kishore R  Saxena SS. Ligating internal iliac artery:
success beyond hesitation. J Obstet Gynaecol India2016;66(Suppl 1):235 e41.
87.Liu Z  Wang Y  Yan J  et al. Uterine artery embolization versus
hysterectomy in the treatment of refractory postpartum hemorrhage: asystematic review and meta-analysis. J Matern Fetal Neonatal Med
2020;33:693 e705.
88.Kim TH  Lee HH  Kim JM  et al. Uterine artery embolization for primary
postpartum hemorrhage. Iran J Reprod Med 2013;11:511 e8.
89.Zhang Y  Yan J  Han Q  et al. Emergency obstetric hysterectomy for life-
threatening postpartum hemorrhage: a 12-year review. Medicine(Baltimore) 2017;96:e8443 .90.Ballas J  Roberts S. Hypovolemic shock. In: Phelan JP   editor. Critical care
obstetrics .6
thed. Oxford (UK): John Wiley & Sons Ltd; 2019. p. 535 e45.
91.Gross J. Estimating allowable blood loss: corrected for dilution.
Anesthesiology 1983;58:277 e80.
92. Blood  still saving lives but .there are risks (video). Available at: https://
www.blood.gov.au/health-professionals . Accessed on June 1  2021.
93.Cohen WR. Obstetric hemorrhage and hypothermia: chilling facts. Open J
Obstet Gynecol 2018;8:2160 e270.
94.Henriquez DDCA  Bloemenkamp KWM  Loeff RM  et al. Fluid
resuscitation during persistent postpartum haemorrhage and maternaloutcome: a nationwide cohort study. Eur J Obstetr Gynecol Reprod Biol
2019;235:49 e56.
95. Lotterman S  Sharma S. Blood transfusion. Treasure Island (FL): StatPearls
Publishing. Available at: https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/NBK4
99824/ . Accessed on June 1  2021.
96.Prick BW   Jansen AJ  Steegers EA  et al. Transfusion policy after
severe postpartum haemorrhage: a randomised non-inferiority trial. BJOG2014;121:1005 e14.
97.Collis R  Guasch E. Managing major obstetric haemorrhage:
pharmacotherapy and transfusion. Best Pract Res Clin Anaesthesiol
2017;31:107 e24.
98.Chua S  Gupta S  Curnow J  et al. Intravenous iron vs blood for acute post-
partum anaemia (IIBAPPA): a prospective randomised trial. BMCPregnancy Childbirth 2017;17:424 .
99.Holm C  Thomsen LL  Norgaard A  et al. Single-dose intravenous iron
infusion versus red blood cell transfusion for the treatment of severepostpartum anaemia: a randomized controlled pilot study. Vox Sang2017;112:122 e31.
100. Jones RM  de Lloyd L  Kealaher EJ  et al. Platelet count and transfusion
requirements during moderate or severe postpartum haemorrhage.
Anaesthesia 2016;71:648 e56.
101. Ontario Regional Blood Coordinating Network (ORBCoN). Bloody easy 4:
blood transfusions  alternatives and transfusion reactions. A guide totransfusion medicine. 4
thed. ORBCON. Available at: ﬁle:///C:/Users/
cgreen/Downloads/EN_BE4-JULY11_FINAL.pdf . Accessed on June 1 
2021.
102. Lumbreras-Marquez MI  Villela-Franyutti D  Reale SC  et al. Coagulation
management in obstetric anesthesia. Curr Anesthesiol Rep
2022;12:266 e76.
103. Ducloy-Bouthors AS  Mercier FJ  Grouin JM  et al. Early and systematic
administration of ﬁbrinogen concentrate in postpartum haemorrhage
following vaginal delivery: the FIDEL randomised controlled trial. BJOG2021;128:1814 e23.
104. Sahin AS  Ozkan S. Treatment of obstetric hemorrhage with ﬁbrinogen
concentrate. Med Sci Monit 2019;25:1814 e21.
105. O’Brien KL  Shainker SA  Lockhart EL. Transfusion management of
obstetric hemorrhage. Transfus Med Rev 2018;32:249 e55.
106. Bell SF  Collis RE  Bailey C  et al. The incidence  aetiology  and coagulation
management of massive postpartum haemorrhage: a two-year nationalprospective cohort study. Int J Obstet Anesth 2021;47:102983 .
107. Ramler PI  Gillissen A  Henriquez D  et al. Clinical value of early
viscoelastometric point-of-care testing during postpartum hemorrhagefor the prediction of severity of bleeding: a multicenter prospectivecohort study in the Netherlands. Acta Obstet Gynecol Scand2021;100:1656 e64.
108. McNamara H  Kenyon C  Smith R  et al. Four years ’experience of a
ROTEM -guided algorithm for treatment of coagulopathy in obstetric
haemorrhage. Anaesthesia 2019;74:984 e91.
109. Callum J  Yeh CH  Petrosoniak A  et al. A regional MHP
developed through a modi ﬁed Delphi techni que. CMAJ Open
2019;7:E546 e61.
DECEMBER JOGC DÉCEMBRE 2022
l1309PPH and Hemorrhagic Shock
Downloaded for Anonymous User (n/a) at University of the Andes from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on August 19  
2023. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2023. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
###18###110. Epstein D  Solomon N  Korytny A  et al. Association between ionized
calcium and severity of postpartum hemorrhage: a retrospective cohort
study. Brit J Anaesth 2021;126:1022 e8.
111. Leonard MW   Frankel AS. Role of effective teamwork and
communication in delivering safe  high-quality care. Mt Sinai J Med2011;78:820 e6.112. Cheng A  Eppich W   Kolbe M  et al. A conceptual framework for the
development of debrie ﬁng skills: a journey of discovery  growth and
maturity. Simul Healthc 2020;15:55 e60.
113. Sawyer T  Eppich W   Brett-Fleegler M  et al. More than one way to debrief:
a critical review of healthcare simulation debrie ﬁng methods. Simul Healthc
2016;11:209 e17.
1310
lDECEMBER JOGC DÉCEMBRE 2022SOGC CLINICAL PRACTICE GUIDELINE
Downloaded for Anonymous User (n/a) at University of the Andes from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on August 19  
2023. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2023. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
###19###APPENDIX A
Table 1. Key to Grading of Recommendations  Assessment  Development and Evaluation Quality of Evidence
Grade Deﬁnition
Strength of recommendation
Strong High level of con ﬁdence that the desirable effects outweigh the undesirable effects (strong recommendation
for) or the undesirable effects outweigh the desirable effects (strong recommendation against)
ConditionalaDesirable effects probably outweigh the undesirable effects (weak recommendation for) or the undesirable
effects probably outweigh the desirable effects (weak recommendation against)
Quality of evidence
High High level of con ﬁdence that the true effect lies close to that of the estimate of the effect
Moderate Moderate con ﬁdence in the effect estimate:
The true effect is likely to be close to the estimate of the effect  but there is a possibility that it is substantiallydifferent
Low Limited con ﬁdence in the effect estimate:
The true effect may be substantially different from the estimate of the effect
Very low Very little con ﬁdence in the effect estimate:
The true effect is likely to be substantially different from the estimate of effect
aDo not interpret conditional recommendations to mean weak evidence or uncertainty of the recommendation.
Adapted from GRADE Handbook (2013)  Table 5.1.
Table 2. Implications of Strong and Conditional recommendations  by guideline user
Perspective Strong Recommendation
/C15“We recommend that .”
/C15“We recommend to not .”Conditional (Weak) Recommendation
/C15“We suggest .”
/C15“We suggest to not .”
Authors The net desirable effects of a course of action outweigh the
effects of the alternative course of action.It is less clear whether the net desirable consequences of
a strategy outweigh the alternative strategy.
Patients Most individuals in the situation would want the
recommended course of action  while only a small
proportion would not.The majority of individuals in the situation would want the
suggested course of action  but many would not.
Clinicians Most individuals should receive the course of action.
Adherence to this recommendation according to the
guideline could be used as a quality criterion orperformance indicator.Recognize that patient choices will vary by individual and
that clinicians must help patients arrive at a care
decision consistent with the patient ’s values and
preferences.
Policymakers The recommendation can be adapted as policy in most
settings.The recommendation can serve as a starting point for
debate with the involvement of many stakeholders.
Adapted from GRADE Handbook (2013)  Table 6.1.
DECEMBER JOGC DÉCEMBRE 2022 l1310.e1PPH and Hemorrhagic Shock
Downloaded for Anonymous User (n/a) at University of the Andes from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on August 19  
2023. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2023. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
