###1###  
WHO recommendations 
for the prevention  
and treatment of  
postpartum haemorrhage
For more information  please contact:
Department of Reproductive Health and Research  
World Health Organization  
Avenue Appia 20  CH-1211 Geneva 27  
Switzerland  
Fax: +41 22 791 4171  
E-mail: reproductivehealth@who.int  
www.who.int/reproductivehealth
Maternal  Newborn  Child and Adolescent Health
E-mail: mncah@who.intwww.who.int/maternal_child_adolescent

###2### 
###3###WHO recommendations for the  
prevention and treatment of  
postpartum haemorrhage
###4###WHO Library Cataloguing-in-Publication Data
 WHO recommendations for the prevention and treatment of postpartum haemorrhage.
 1.Postpartum hemorrhage – prevention and control. 2.Postpartum hemorrhage – therapy.  
 3.Obstetric labor complications. 4.Guideline.  I.World Health Organization.
	 ISBN	978	92	4	154850	2	 	 	 (NLM	classification:		WQ	330)
© World Health Organization 2012
All rights reserved. Publications of the World Health Organization are available on the WHO web site 
(www.who.int)	or	can	be	purchased	from	WHO	Press 	World	Health	Organization 	20	 Avenue	Appia 	1211	
Geneva	27 	Switzerland	(tel.:	+41	22	791	3264;	fax:	+41	22	791	4857;	e-mail:	bookorders@who.int).	  
Requests for permission to reproduce or translate WHO publications – whether for sale or for noncom -
mercial	distribution	–	should	be	addressed	to	WHO	Press	through	the	WHO	web	site	(http://www.who.int/
about/licensing/copyright_form/en/index.html).
The designations employed and the presentation of the material in this publication do not imply the 
expression	of	any	opinion	whatsoever	on	the	part	of	the	World	Health	Organization	concerning	the	legal	
status	of	any	country 	territory 	city	or	area	or	of	its	authorities 	or	concerning	the	delimitation	of	its	
frontiers	or	boundaries.	Dotted	lines	on	maps	represent	approximate	border	lines	for	which	there	may	not	
yet be full agreement.
The	mention	of	specific	companies	or	of	certain	manufacturers’ 	products	does	not	imply	that	they	are	en -
dorsed or recommended by the World Health Organization in preference to others of a similar nature that 
are	not	mentioned.	Errors	and	omissions	excepted 	the	names	of	proprietary	products	are	distinguished	
by initial capital letters.
All	reasonable	precautions	have	been	taken	by	the	World	Health	Organization	to	verify	the	information	
contained	in	this	publication.		However 	the	published	material	is	being	distributed	without	warranty	of	
any	kind 	either	expressed	or	implied.		 The	responsibility	for	the	interpretation	and	use	of	the	material	
lies with the reader.  In no event shall the World Health Organization be liable for damages arising from 
its use.  
Printed in Italy
###5###Contents
Acknowledgements	 1
Abbreviations 2
Executive summary 3
Box	A:		 Recommendations	for	the	prevention	of	PPH	 5
Box	B:		 Recommendations	for	the	treatment	of	PPH	 6
Box	C:		 Recommendations	on	organization	of	care	 7
1. Background 8
2. Methods 9
3. Results 12
Box	1:		 Recommendations	for	the	prevention	of	PPH	–	uterotonics	 15
Box	2:		 Recommendations	for	the	prevention	of	PPH	–	cord	management	  
and	uterine	massage	 16
Table	1:	Recommendation	status	of	the	individual	components	of	  
the	active	management	of	the	third	stage	of	labour 	based	on	who	  
delivers the intervention 18
Box	3:		 Recommendations	for	the	prevention	of	PPH	in	caesarean	sections	 18
Box	4:		 Recommendations	for	the	treatment	of	PPH	–	uterotonics	 19
Box	5:		 Recommendations	for	the	treatment	of	PPH	–	fluid	resuscitation	  
and	tranexamic	acid	 19
Box	6:		 Recommendations	for	the	treatment	of	PPH	–	manoeuvres	and	  
other procedures 20
Box	7:		 Recommendations	for	the	treatment	of	retained 	placenta	 21
Box	8:		 Health 	Systems	and	 Organization	of	Care	recommendations		 22
Box	9:		 Statements	related	 to	topics	for	which	there	is	insufficient	  
evidence to issue a recommendation 23
4. Research implications 24
5. Dissemination and implementation of the guideline 25
6. Applicability issues 26
7. Updating the guideline 27
References 27
Annex 1.  External experts  WHO staff involved in the preparation of  
the guideline  and summary of declarations of interest 29
Annex 2.  Critical outcomes for decision making 33
Annex 3:  Summary of the considerations related to the strength of the recom -
mendations (Balance Worksheets) 34
Box	1.		 Summary	of	considerations	related	to	the	strength	of	  
the	recommendations	(Recommendations	1–5)		 34
###6###The	standardized	criteria	used	in	grading	the	evidence 	the	narrative	summaries	of	
evidence and GRADE tables are not included in this document . This material has 
been published in a separate document entitled “WHO recommendations for post ­
partum haemorrhage: evidence base ”	and	can	be	accessed	online	at:	www.who.int/
reproductivehealth/publications/maternal_perinatal_health/9789241548502/en/Box	2.		 Summary	of	considerations	related	to	the	strength	of	  
the	recommendations	(Recommendations	6–10)		 35
Box	3.		 Summary	of	considerations	related	to	the	strength	of	  
the	recommendations	(Recommendations	11–15)		 36
Box	4.		 Summary	of	considerations	related	to	the	strength	of	  
the	recommendations	(Recommendations	16–20)		 37
Box	5.		 Summary	of	considerations	related	to	the	strength	of	  
the	recommendations	(Recommendations	21–25)		 38
Box	6.		 Summary	of	considerations	related	to	the	strength	of	  
the	recommendations	(Recommendations	26–30)		 39
Box	7.		 Summary	of	considerations	related	to	the	strength	of	  
the	recommendations	(Recommendations	31–32)		 40
Box	8.		 Template	for	the	summary	of	considerations	related	to	  
the	strength	of	the	recommendations	with	explanations	for	  
completing the template  41
###7###WHO recommendations for the prevention and treatment of postpartum haemorrhage
1
Acknowledgements
Work	on	this	guideline	was	initiated	by	 A.	Metin	Gülmezoglu	and	João	Paulo	Souza 	
of	the	WHO	Department	of	Reproductive	Health	and	Research 	and	by	Matthews	
Mathai 	of	the	WHO	Department	of	Maternal 	Newborn 	Child	and	 Adolescent	Health.	
João	Paulo	Souza	coordinated	the	development	of	the	present	guideline	and	drafted	
this	document.	Edgardo	 Abalos	and	Virginia	Diaz 	of	the	Centro	Rosarino	de	Estudios	
Perinatales	(CREP) 	Rosario 	 Argentina 	reviewed	the	scientific	evidence	related	to	
the	prevention	and	treatment	of	Postpartum	Haemorrhage	(PPH)	and	produced	the	
GRADE	tables	used	in	this	guideline.	Natasha	Hezelgrave 	of	the	 Academic	Women’s	
Health	Centre 	King’s	College	London	(KCL) 	United	Kingdom	(UK) 	drafted	the	nar -
rative	summaries	of	evidence.	 The	GRADE	tables	were	double-checked	by	Kanokwa -
roon	Watananirun	(Fon)	of	the	University	of	Bangkok 	 Thailand.	 A.	Metin	Gülmezo -
glu 	Matthews	Mathai	and	Edgardo	 Abalos	commented	on	the	draft	document	before	
it was reviewed by Natasha Hezelgrave and participants at the WHO Technical 
Consultation	on	the	Prevention	and	 Treatment	of	PPH	(see	 Annex	1).	
Thanks	to	Zahida	Qureshi 	of	the	University	of	Nairobi 	Kenya 	for	serving	as	the	
Chairperson	of	the	 Technical	Consultation.	We	acknowledge	gratefully	the	valuable	
feedback	given	by	a	large	number	of	international	stakeholders	during	the	online	
consultation	which	took	place	as	part	of	this	process.
WHO	is	grateful	for	the	continued	support	of	the	United	States	 Agency	for	Inter -
national	Development	(USAID)	in	this	area	of	work.	Special	thanks	are	also	due	to	
Gynuity	Health	Projects	for	providing	additional	financial	support	for	this	guideline	
work.	WHO	also	wishes	to	thank	the	authors	of	the	systematic	reviews	used	in	this	
guideline for their assistance and collaboration in updating them. WHO is also grate -
ful	to	the	Cochrane	Pregnancy	and	Childbirth	Group 	especially	the	staff	at	their	
Liverpool	office	in	the	United	Kingdom 	for	their	support	in	updating	the	Cochrane	
reviews.
###8###WHO recommendations for the prevention and treatment of postpartum haemorrhage
2
Abbreviations
AGREE Appraisal of Guidelines Research and Evaluation
AMTSL  Active Management of the Third Stage of Labour
CCT Controlled Cord Traction 
CI	 Confidence	Interval
GREAT	 Guideline	development 	Research	priorities 	Evidence	synthesis 	  
		 	 Applicability	of	evidence 	 Transfer	of	knowledge	(a	WHO	project)
GDG Guideline Development Group
GRADE	 Grading	of	Recommendations	 Assessment 	Development	and	Evaluation
HIV	 Human	immunodeficiency	virus
IM Intramuscular
IU	 International	Unit
IV Intravenous
MCA	 Maternal 	Child	and	 Adolescent	Department
µg Microgram 
MMR Maternal Mortality Ratio
PICO	 Population 	Interventions 	Comparisons 	and	Outcomes
PO	 Per	Os	(orally)
PPH Postpartum Haemorrhage
RCT Randomized Controlled Trial
RevMan	 Review	Manager	(software)
RR	 Relative	Risk
OR Odds Ratio
USAID	 United	States	 Agency	for	International	Development
###9###WHO recommendations for the prevention and treatment of postpartum haemorrhage
3
Executive summary
Introduction
Postpartum	Haemorrhage	(PPH)	is	commonly	defined	as	a	blood	loss	of	500	ml	or	
more within 24 hours after birth. PPH is the leading cause of maternal mortality in 
low-income countries and the primary cause of nearly one quarter of all maternal 
deaths	globally.	Most	deaths	resulting	from	PPH	occur	during	the	first	24	hours	after	
birth:	the	majority	of	these	could	be	avoided	through	the	use	of	prophylactic	utero -
tonics during the third stage of labour and by timely and appropriate management. 
Improving health care for women during childbirth in order to prevent and treat PPH 
is an essential step towards the achievement of the Millennium Development Goals. 
The primary objective of this guideline therefore is to provide a foundation for the 
strategic policy and programme development needed to ensure the sustainable 
implementation of effective interventions for reducing the global burden of PPH. 
Guideline development methods
The procedures used in the development of this guideline are outlined in the “ WHO 
handbook for guideline development ”1.	Briefly 	these	procedures	are:	(i)	the	identi -
fication	of	questions	related	to	clinical	practice	and	health	policy	for	which	answers	
are	needed 	(ii)	the	retrieval	of	up-to-date	research-based	evidence 	(iii)	the	as -
sessment	and	synthesis	of	evidence 	(iv)	the	formulation	of	recommendations	using	
input	from	a	wide	range	of	stakeholders 	and	(v)	the	formulation	of	plans	for	the	
dissemination 	implementation 	impact	evaluation	and	updating	of	the	guideline.	
The	scientific	evidence	for	the	recommendations	was	synthesized	using	the	Grading	
of	Recommendations	 Assessment 	Development	and	Evaluation	(GRADE)	methodol -
ogy.	For	each	of	the	previous	WHO	recommendations	on	PPH	(2007	and	2009)	and	
for	all	the	newly-added	questions 	evidence	profiles	were	prepared	based	on	22	
up-to-date systematic reviews. The revised and new recommendations were devel -
oped	and	adopted	by	an	international	group	of	experts	who	participated	in	the	WHO	
Technical	Consultation	on	the	Prevention	and	 Treatment	of	PPH 	held	in	Montreux 	
Switzerland 	6–8	March	2012.	
The WHO Technical Consultation adopted 32 recommendations and these are shown 
in	Boxes	 A 	B	and	C.	For	each	recommendation 	the	quality	of	the	supporting	evi -
dence	is	graded	as	‘very	low’ 	‘low’ 	‘moderate’ 	or	‘high’.	 The	contributing	stake -
holders	qualified	the	strength	of	these	recommendations	by	taking	the	quality	of	the	
evidence and other factors into account (including the values and preferences of 
stakeholders 	the	magnitude	of	effect 	the	balance	of	benefits	versus	disadvantages 	
resource	usage 	and	the	feasibility	of	each	recommendation).	 To	ensure	that	each	
recommendation	is	correctly	understood	and	used	in	practice 	additional	remarks	
have	also	been	included 	and	these	are	noted	in	the	full	document	below	the	recom -
mendations.	Readers	should	refer	to	these	remarks	in	the	full	version	of	the	guide -
line if they are in any doubt about the meaning of each recommendation.
1 WHO handbook for guideline development .	Geneva 	World	Health	Organization 	2012.
###10###WHO recommendations for the prevention and treatment of postpartum haemorrhage
4
Recommendations for PPH prevention
The intrinsic contribution of each component of the ‘active management of the 
third	stage	of	labour’ 	was	examined	in	light	of	new	available	evidence 	and	relevant	
recommendations were made. All women giving birth should be offered uterotonics 
during	the	third	stage	of	labour	for	the	prevention	of	PPH;	oxytocin	(IM/IV 	10	IU)	
is recommended as the uterotonic drug of choice. Other injectable uterotonics and 
misoprostol are recommended as alternatives for the prevention of PPH in settings 
where	oxytocin	is	unavailable.	 The	importance	of	controlled	cord	traction	(CCT)	was	
revisited because of new evidence. This intervention is now regarded as optional 
in	settings	where	skilled	birth	attendants	are	available 	and	is	contraindicated	in	
settings	where	skilled	attendants	do	not	assist	with	births.	Early	cord	clamping	is	
generally contraindicated. Continuous uterine massage is not recommended as an 
intervention	to	prevent	PPH	in	women	who	have	received	prophylactic	oxytocin 	
as	it	may	cause	maternal	discomfort 	require	a	dedicated	health	professional 	and	
may	not	lead	to	a	reduction	of	blood	loss.	However 	surveillance	of	uterine	tonus	
through	abdominal	palpation	is	recommended	in	all	women	for	early	identification	
of	postpartum	uterine	atony.	In	summary 	the	Guideline	Development	Group	(GDG)	
considered the use of uterotonics as the main intervention within the active man -
agement	of	third	stage	of	labour	package.	In	this	context 	the	use	of	misoprostol	for	
the	prevention	of	PPH	by	community	health	care	workers	and	lay	health	workers	is	
supported	in	settings	where	skilled	birth	attendants	are	not	present.
The GDG also issued recommendations for reducing blood loss during the third stage 
of	labour	in	caesarean	sections.	Oxytocin	is	the	recommended	uterotonic	drug	for	
the prevention of PPH in caesarean sections. Cord traction is recommended in pref -
erence to manual removal when assisting placental delivery in caesarean sections.
Recommendations for PPH treatment
The	use	of	uterotonics	(oxytocin	alone	as	the	first	choice)	plays	a	central	role	in	
the	treatment	of	PPH.	Uterine	massage	is	recommended	for	the	treatment	of	PPH	
as	soon	as	it	is	diagnosed 	and	initial	fluid	resuscitation	with	isotonic	crystalloids	is	
recommended.	 The	use	of	tranexamic	acid	is	advised	in	cases	of	refractory	atonic	
bleeding or persistent trauma-related bleeding. The use of intrauterine balloon 
tamponade is recommended for refractory bleeding or if uterotonics are unavail -
able.	Bimanual	uterine	compression 	external	aortic	compression 	and	the	use	of	
non-pneumatic	anti-shock	garments	are	recommended	as	temporizing	measures	until	
substantive care is available. If there is persistent bleeding and the relevant re -
sources	are	available 	uterine	artery	embolization	should	be	considered.	If	bleeding	
persists 	despite	treatment	with	uterotonic	drugs	and	other	conservative	interven -
tions 	surgical	intervention	should	be	used	without	further	delay.
If	the	third	stage	of	labour	lasts	more	than	30	minutes 	CCT 	and	IV/IM	oxytocin	
(10	IU)	should	be	used	to	manage	the	retained	placenta.	If	the	placenta	is	retained	
and	bleeding	occurs 	the	manual	removal	of	the	placenta	should	be	expedited.	
Whenever	the	manual	removal	of	the	placenta	is	undertaken 	a	single	dose	of	pro -
phylactic antibiotics is recommended.
The GDG also issued recommendations related to the organization of PPH care. 
Health facilities delivering maternity services should adopt formal protocols for the 
prevention and treatment of PPH and for patient referral. The use of PPH treatment 
###11###WHO recommendations for the prevention and treatment of postpartum haemorrhage
5
simulations for pre-service and in-service training programmes was recommended. 
Finally 	the	GDG	recommended	that	the	use	of	uterotonics	for	the	prevention	of	PPH	
should	be	monitored	and	a	specific	indicator	was	suggested.
Box A: Recommendations for the prevention of PPH
1. The use of uterotonics for the prevention of PPH during the third stage of labour is recom -
mended	for	all	births.	(Strong	recommendation 	moderate-quality	evidence)
2. Oxytocin	(10	IU 	IV/IM)	is	the	recommended	uterotonic	drug	for	the	prevention	of	PPH.	
(Strong	recommendation 	moderate-quality	evidence)
3. In	settings	where	oxytocin	is	unavailable 	the	use	of	other	injectable	uterotonics	(if	appro -
priate	ergometrine/methylergometrine	or	the	fixed	drug	combination	of	oxytocin	and	ergo -
metrine)	or	oral	misoprostol	(600  µg)	is	recommended.	(Strong	recommendation 	moderate-
quality	evidence)
4. In	settings	where	skilled	birth	attendants	are	not	present	and	oxytocin	is	unavailable 	the	
administration	of	misoprostol	(600  µg	PO)	by	community	health	care	workers	and	lay	health	
workers	is	recommended	for	the	prevention	of	PPH.	(Strong	recommendation 	moderate-
quality	evidence)
5. In	settings	where	skilled	birth	attendants	are	available 	CCT 	is	recommended	for	vaginal	
births if the care provider and the parturient woman regard a small reduction in blood loss 
and	a	small	reduction	in	the	duration	of	the	third	stage	of	labour	as	important	(Weak	recom -
mendation 	high-quality	evidence)	
6.	In	settings	where	skilled	birth	attendants	are	unavailable 	CCT 	is	not	recommended.	(Strong	
recommendation 	moderate-quality	evidence)
7. Late	cord	clamping	(performed	after	1	to	3	minutes	after	birth)	is	recommended	for	all	births	
while	initiating	simultaneous	essential	newborn	care.	(Strong	recommendation 	moderate-
quality	evidence)
8. Early	cord	clamping	(<1	minute	after	birth)	is	not	recommended	unless	the	neonate	is	as -
phyxiated	and	needs	to	be	moved	immediately	for	resuscitation.	(Strong	recommendation 	
moderate-quality	evidence)
9. Sustained uterine massage is not recommended as an intervention to prevent PPH in women 
who	have	received	prophylactic	oxytocin.	(Weak	recommendation 	low-quality	evidence)
10. Postpartum	abdominal	uterine	tonus	assessment	for	early	identification	of	uterine	atony	is	
recommended	for	all	women.	(Strong	recommendation 	very-low-quality	evidence)
11. Oxytocin	(IV	or	IM)	is	the	recommended	uterotonic	drug	for	the	prevention	of	PPH	in	caesar -
ean	section.	(Strong	recommendation 	moderate-quality	evidence)
12. Controlled cord traction is the recommended method for removal of the placenta in caesar -
ean	section.	(Strong	recommendation 	moderate-quality	evidence)
###12###WHO recommendations for the prevention and treatment of postpartum haemorrhage
6
Box B: Recommendations for the treatment of PPH
13. Intravenous	oxytocin	alone	is	the	recommended	uterotonic	drug	for	the	treatment	of	PPH.	
(Strong	recommendation 	moderate-quality	evidence)
14. If	intravenous	oxytocin	is	unavailable 	or	if	the	bleeding	does	not	respond	to	oxytocin 	the	use	
of	intravenous	ergometrine 	oxytocin-ergometrine	fixed	dose 	or	a	prostaglandin	drug	(includ -
ing	sublingual	misoprostol 	800	 µg)	is	recommended.	(Strong	recommendation 	low-quality	
evidence)
15. The use of isotonic crystalloids is recommended in preference to the use of colloids for the 
initial	intravenous	fluid	resuscitation	of	women	with	PPH.	(Strong	recommendation 	low-qual -
ity	evidence)
16.	The	use	of	tranexamic	acid	is	recommended	for	the	treatment	of	PPH	if	oxytocin	and	other	
uterotonics fail to stop bleeding or if it is thought that the bleeding may be partly due to 
trauma.	(Weak	recommendation 	moderate-quality	evidence)
17. Uterine	massage	is	recommended	for	the	treatment	of	PPH.	(Strong	recommendation 	very-
low-quality	evidence)
18. If	women	do	not	respond	to	treatment	using	uterotonics 	or	if	uterotonics	are	unavailable 	
the use of intrauterine balloon tamponade is recommended for the treatment of PPH due to 
uterine	atony.	(Weak	recommendation 	very-low-quality	evidence)
19. If	other	measures	have	failed	and	if	the	necessary	resources	are	available 	the	use	of	uter -
ine	artery	embolization	is	recommended	as	a	treatment	for	PPH	due	to	uterine	atony.	(Weak	
recommendation 	very-low-quality	evidence)
20. If bleeding does not stop in spite of treatment using uterotonics and other available conserva -
tive	interventions	(e.g.	uterine	massage 	balloon	tamponade) 	the	use	of	surgical	interven -
tions	is	recommended.	(Strong	recommendation 	very-low-quality	evidence)
21. The use of bimanual uterine compression is recommended as a temporizing measure until ap -
propriate care is available for the treatment of PPH due to uterine atony after vaginal deliv -
ery.	(Weak	recommendation 	very-low-quality	evidence)
22. The	use	of	external	aortic	compression	for	the	treatment	of	PPH	due	to	uterine	atony	after	
vaginal birth is recommended as a temporizing measure until appropriate care is available. 
(Weak	recommendation 	very-low-quality	evidence)
23. The	use	of	non-pneumatic	anti-shock	garments	is	recommended	as	a	temporizing	measure	
until	appropriate	care	is	available.	(Weak	recommendation 	low-quality	evidence)
24. The	use	of	 uterine	packing	is	not	recommended	 for	the	treatment	 of	PPH	due	to	uterine	 atony	
after	vaginal	birth.	(Weak	recommendation 	very-low-quality	evidence)
25. If	the	placenta	is	not	expelled	spontaneously 	the	use	of	IV/IM	oxytocin	(10	IU)	in	combina -
tion	with	controlled	cord	traction	is	recommended.	(Weak	recommendation 	very-low-quality	
evidence)
26.	The use of ergometrine for the management of retained placenta is not recommended as this 
may	cause	tetanic	uterine	contractions	which	may	delay	the	expulsion	of	the	placenta.	(Weak	
recommendation 	very-low-quality	evidence)
27. The	use	of	prostaglandin	E2	alpha	(dinoprostone	or	sulprostone)	for	the	management	of	re -
tained	placenta	is	not	recommended.	(Weak	recommendation 	very-low-quality	evidence)
28. A	single	dose	of	antibiotics	(ampicillin	or	first-generation	cephalosporin)	is	recommended	if	
manual	removal	of	the	placenta	is	practised.	(Weak	recommendation 	very-low-quality	evi -
dence)
###13###WHO recommendations for the prevention and treatment of postpartum haemorrhage
7
Box C: Organization of care
29. The use of formal protocols by health facilities for the prevention and treatment of PPH is 
recommended.	(Weak	recommendation 	moderate-quality	evidence)
30. The use of formal protocols for referral of women to a higher level of care is recommended 
for	health	facilities.	(Weak	recommendation 	very-low-quality	evidence)
31. The use of simulations of PPH treatment is recommended for pre-service and in-service train -
ing	programmes.	(Weak	recommendation 	very-low-quality	evidence)
32. Monitoring the use of uterotonics after birth for the prevention of PPH is recommended as 
a	process	indicator	for	programmatic	evaluation.	(Weak	recommendation 	very-low-quality	
evidence)
###14###WHO recommendations for the prevention and treatment of postpartum haemorrhage
8
1. Background
Postpartum	Haemorrhage	(PPH)	is	commonly	defined	as	a	blood	loss	of	500	ml	or	
more	within	24	hours	after	birth 	while	severe	PPH	is	defined	as	a	blood	loss	of	
1000	ml	or	more	within	the	same	timeframe.	PPH	affects	approximately	2%	of	all	
women	who	give	birth:	it	is	associated	not	only	with	nearly	one	quarter	of	all	ma -
ternal deaths globally but is also the leading cause of maternal mortality in most 
low-income	countries.	PPH	is	a	significant	contributor	to	severe	maternal	morbidity	
and long-term disability as well as to a number of other severe maternal conditions 
generally	 associated	 with	more	substantial	 blood	loss 	including	 shock	and	 organ	dys -
function.	(1–3)
Uterine	atony	is	the	most	common	cause	of	PPH 	but	genital	tract	trauma	(i.e.	vagi -
nal	or	cervical	lacerations) 	uterine	rupture 	retained	placental	tissue 	or	maternal	
coagulation disorders may also result in PPH. Although the majority of women who 
experience	PPH	complications	have	no	identifiable	clinical	or	historical	risk	factors 	
grand	multiparity	and	multiple	gestation	are	associated	with	an	increased	risk	of	
bleeding	after	birth.	PPH	may	be	aggravated	by	pre-existing	anaemia	and 	in	such	
instances 	the	loss	of	a	smaller	volume	of	blood	may	still	result	in	adverse	clinical	
sequelae.	(4)
During	the	second	half	of	the	20th	century 	a	package	of	interventions	performed	
during the third stage of labour became the cornerstone for the prevention of 
PPH.	This	approach	became	known	as	the	“active	management	of	the	third	stage	
of	labour”	and	consisted	initially	of	the	following	components:	the	administration	
of	a	prophylactic	uterotonic	after	the	delivery	of	a	baby 	early	cord	clamping	and	
cutting 	and	the	controlled	traction	of	the	umbilical	cord.	Uterine	massage	is	also	
frequently included as part of the active management of the third stage of labour. 
In contrast to active	management 	 expectant  management involves instead waiting 
for signs of placenta separation and allows for the placenta to be delivered sponta -
neously 	or	aided	by	nipple	stimulation	or	gravity.	Compared	with	expectant	man -
agement 	the	active	management	of	the	third	stage	of	labour	is	associated	with	a	
substantial	reduction	in	the	occurrence	of	PPH.	(5)
It	is	generally	assumed	that	by	preventing	and	treating	PPH 	most	PPH-associated	
deaths could be avoided. The prevention and treatment of PPH are therefore 
vital steps towards improving the health care of women during childbirth and the 
achievement	of	the	Millennium	Development	Goals.	 To	reach	these	objectives 	
health	workers	in	developing	countries	should	be	given	access	to	appropriate	medi -
cations and be trained in procedures relevant to the management of PPH. Countries 
also need evidence-based guidance to inform their health policies and improve their 
health outcomes. 
Given	the	availability	of	new	scientific	evidence	related	to	the	prevention	and	treat -
ment	of	PPH 	the	aim	of	this	document	is	to	revise	previous	WHO	recommendations	
for the prevention and treatment of PPH and to add new recommendations. The 
primary goal of this guideline is to provide a foundation for the implementation of 
strategic policy and programme developments for interventions shown to have been 
effective in reducing the burden of PPH. Health professionals responsible for de -
veloping national and local protocols and health policies constitute the main target 
audience	of	this	document.	Obstetricians 	midwives 	general	medical	practitioners 	
health	care	managers	and	public	health	policy-makers 	particularly	in	under-re -
###15###WHO recommendations for the prevention and treatment of postpartum haemorrhage
9
sourced settings are also targeted. The guidance provided is evidence-informed and 
covers topics related to the management of PPH that were selected and prioritized 
by	an	international 	multidisciplinary	group	of	health	care	workers 	consumers	and	
other	stakeholders.	 This	document	establishes	general	principles	of	PPH	care	and	it	
is intended to inform the development of protocols and health policies related to 
PPH. This document is not intended to provide a comprehensive practical guide for 
the prevention and treatment of PPH.
2. Methods
This guideline is an update of the “ WHO recommendations for the prevention of 
PPH” published in 2007 and the “ WHO guidelines for the management of PPH and 
retained placenta ”	published	in	2009	(6 7).	 This	document	represents	WHO’s	nor -
mative support for using evidence-informed policies and practices in all countries. 
The	guideline	forms	part	of	a	WHO	knowledge-to-action	project	entitled	GREAT 	
(Guideline	development 	Research	priorities 	Evidence	synthesis 	 Applicability	of	
evidence 	 Transfer	of	knowledge)	(8)	and	was	developed	using	standardized	operat -
ing procedures in accordance with the process described in the “WHO handbook for 
guideline development ” (9).	In	summary 	the	process	included:	(i)  the	identification	
of	critical	questions	and	critical	outcomes 	(ii)  the	retrieval	of	the	evidence 	(iii)	the	
assessment	and	synthesis	of	evidence 	(iv)  the	formulation	of	recommendations 	and	
(v) planning	for	the	dissemination 	implementation 	impact	evaluation	and	updating	
of the guideline.
Two	technical	groups	have	worked	in	the	development	of	this	guideline.	 A	small	
operative	group	composed	of	staff	from	the	WHO’s	Department	of	Reproductive	
Health	and	Research 	and	Department	of	Maternal 	Newborn 	Child	and	 Adolescent	
Health	(MCA) 	as	well	as	two	external	experts	(see	 Annex	1	–	 The	guideline	steer -
ing	group)	and	a	larger	group	with	international	stakeholders	including	midwives 	
obstetricians 	neonatologists 	researchers 	experts	in	research	synthesis 	experts	in	
health	care	programmes 	and	consumer	representatives	(the	Guideline	Development	
Group	–	GDG).	 The	guideline	steering	group	was	formed	in	the	very	beginning	of	the	
project and reviewed the previous WHO guidelines on prevention and treatment of 
PPH	(6 7).	 This	group	prepared	a	list	of	potential	additional	questions	related	to	the	
prevention	and	treatment	of	PPH.	Next 	the	GDG	reviewed	and	prioritized	the	draft	
questions. The guideline steering group then produced a list of all the questions to 
be addressed. This included both questions from the earlier versions of the guideline 
as well as new ones. The guideline steering group also adopted the outcomes used 
in	the	2007	and	2009	guideline	documents.	 These	outcomes 	as	before 	were	rated	
on	a	scale	from	1	to	9.	 A	question	or	outcome	was	defined	as	‘critical’ 	if	it	was	given	
an	average	score	of	7	or	more.	Questions	and	outcomes	with	a	score	of	between	
4	and	6	were	considered	‘important	but	not	critical’ 	while	those	with	a	score	lower	
than 4 were not considered to be important for the purposes of the guideline  
(Annex	2).
###16###WHO recommendations for the prevention and treatment of postpartum haemorrhage
10
Cochrane	systematic	reviews	of	randomized	controlled	trials	(RCTs)	were	the	pri -
mary source of evidence for the recommendations2.	Using	the	assembled	list	of	
questions	and	outcomes 	the	guideline	steering	group	identified	Cochrane	systematic	
reviews that were either relevant or potentially relevant and then evaluated wheth -
er	any	needed	updating.	 A	review	was	considered	to	be	outdated	if	the	last	specified	
date	for	new	trial	searches	was	two	years	ago	or	more 	or	if	there	were	relevant	
studies	still	awaiting	assessment 	as	identified	by	the	standard	search	procedures	of	
the	Cochrane	Pregnancy	and	Childbirth	Group.	Updates	were	performed	using	spe -
cific	standard	search	strategies.	 The	corresponding	authors	of	the	outdated	reviews	
were	invited	to	update	them	within	a	specified	time	period.	In	instances	in	which	
the	corresponding	authors	were	unable	to	do	so 	the	updates	were	undertaken	by	
members of the guideline steering group. The search strategies employed to identify 
the	trials	and	the	specific	criteria	for	trial	inclusion	and	exclusion	are	described	in	
the individual systematic reviews. A systematic review of literature that included 
non-randomized trials was carried out by the guideline steering group members 
when	randomized-trial	data	related	to	specific	questions	were	scarce.
The	following	procedures	were	used	to	extract	the	evidence	for	this	guideline	from	
each	of	these	systematic	reviews:	first 	the	most	recent	version	of	the	Review	
Manager	(RevMan)	file	was	retrieved	from	the	Cochrane	Pregnancy	and	Childbirth	
Cochrane	Group	and	customized	to	reflect	the	key	comparisons	and	outcomes	(those	
that	were	not	relevant	to	the	guideline	were	excluded).	 Then	the	RevMan	file	was	
exported	to	the	GRADE	profiler	software	(Grading	of	Recommendations	 Assessment 	
Development	 and	Evaluation)	 and	GRADE	criteria	 were	used	to	critically	 appraise	 the	
retrieved	scientific	evidence.	Finally 	evidence	profiles	(in	the	form	of	GRADE	tables)	
were prepared for each comparison. An online content management system devel -
oped	for	the	GREAT 	project 	namely	the	 Guideline Production System   was used to 
handle	and	share	electronic	files.
The evidence presented in the GRADE tables was derived from a larger body of data 
extracted	primarily	from	Cochrane	reviews	which 	in	many	cases 	contained	multiple	
comparisons	(Evidence	Base	(EB)	 Tables	1	to	70).	Each	GRADE	table	relates	to	one	
specific	question	or	comparison 	but	some	GRADE	tables	do	not	contain	data	for	all	
critical outcomes. This is because data for those outcomes were not available in the 
Cochrane reviews. The raw data which constitute the basis of the GRADE tables are 
not	included	in	this	document 	but	readers	interested	in	how	these	GRADE	tables	
were constructed may request access to this information. The guideline steering 
group	used	the	information	presented	in	the	GRADE	tables	to	check	if	any	existing	
recommendations	(included	in	the	2007	or	2009	documents)	needed	to	be	revised 	
and to draft recommendations that related to the new questions. Each recom -
mendation was allocated to a thematic module which included the narrative sum -
maries of evidence and the relevant GRADE tables. The standardized criteria used 
in	grading	the	evidence	and	the	thematic	modules	(including	the	GRADE	tables)	
are not included in this document . They have been published separately online 
in a document entitled “ WHO recommendations for preventing and treating PPH: 
evidence base ”	(www.who.int/reproductivehealth/publications/maternal_perina -
tal_health/9789241548502/en).
2	As	part	of	the	Cochrane	pre-publication	editorial	process 	reviews	are	commented	on	by	three	peers	
(one	editor	and	two	referees	external	to	the	editorial	team)	and	the	Group’s	Statistical	 Adviser	(see	
http://www.cochrane.org/cochrane-reviews ).	“The Cochrane Handbook for Systematic Reviews of Inter ­
ventions ” describes in detail the process of preparing and maintaining Cochrane systematic reviews on 
the effects of health care interventions.
###17###WHO recommendations for the prevention and treatment of postpartum haemorrhage
11
A preliminary online consultation was held to review the draft recommendations. 
The draft recommendations and supporting evidence were made available to a large 
number	of	international	stakeholders	who	were	then	asked	to	respond	to	an	online	
survey.	In	addition 	the	preliminary	online	consultation	identified	other	previous	
recommendations that needed to be discussed at the WHO Technical Consultation 
on	the	Prevention	and	 Treatment	of	PPH	held	in	Montreux 	Switzerland 	6–8	March	
2012.	A	subset	of	the	international	group	of	experts	(who	had	participated	in	the	
online	consultations)	and	other	additional	experts	were	invited	to	attend	the	 Techni -
cal	Consultation	(see	 Annex	1	for	a	full	list	of	participants).	 The	draft	recommen -
dations 	the	narrative	summaries	of	evidence 	the	GRADE	tables	for	the	new	and	
previous	recommendations 	and	other	related	documents	were	provided	in	advance	
to	participants.	Balance	worksheets	were	used	during	the	 Technical	Consultation	to	
summarize	the	values 	preferences	and	judgements	made	about	the	strength	of	the	
new and revised recommendations.
Declaration of interest by participants in the WHO Technical Con -
sultation
According	to	WHO	regulations 	all	experts	must	declare	their	relevant	interests	prior	
to participation in WHO meetings. All GDG members and participants were therefore 
required to complete a Declaration of Interest Form before the meeting. These were 
reviewed by the guideline steering group before the group composition and invita -
tions	were	finalized.	 The	external	advisers	also	verbally	declared	potential	conflicts	
of interest at the beginning of the meeting. The procedures for the management 
of	conflicts	of	interests	were	undertaken	in	accordance	with	the	“ WHO guidelines 
for declaration of interests (WHO experts) ”.	In	summary 	all	members	of	the	GDG	
declared	that	they	had	no	commercial	or	financial	interests	that	were	directly	or	
indirectly	related	to	the	topic	of	the	meeting/guideline.	Seven	members	of	the	
GDG	were	involved	in	academic	work	related	to	the	topic	of	the	guideline 	but	this	
involvement	was	not	considered	to	be	a	conflict	of	interest	and	the	full	participation	
of	all	the	selected	experts	was	deemed	appropriate.	 A	table	summarizing	the	decla -
rations	of	interest	made	by	members	of	the	GDG	is	included	in	 Annex	1.	
Decision-making during the Technical Consultation
At	the	beginning	of	the	 Technical	Consultation 	the	participants	discussed	and	ad -
opted a list of recommendations which needed to be addressed during the meeting. 
This included the new recommendations as well as previous recommendations that 
needed to be reviewed and possibly revised.
The	following	protocol	was	used	for	the	 Technical	Consultation:	the	meeting	was	
structured to allow participants to discuss the proposed list of recommendations and 
these	recommendations	were	revised 	as	needed 	through	group	discussion.	 The	final	
adoption	of	each	recommendation	was	made	by	consensus	–	defined	as	the	agree -
ment by three quarters or more of the participants – provided that those who dis -
agreed did not feel strongly about their position. Strong disagreements were record -
ed	as	such	in	the	guideline.	If	the	participants	were	unable	to	reach	a	consensus 	
the	disputed	recommendation 	or	any	other	decision 	was	put	to	a	vote.	 A	recom -
mendation	or	decision	stood	if	a	simple	majority	(more	than	half	of	the	participants)	
voted	in	support	of	it 	unless	the	disagreement	related	to	a	safety	concern 	in	which	
case the WHO Secretariat would choose not to issue a recommendation at all. WHO 
staff	attending	the	meeting 	external	technical	experts	involved	in	the	collection	
###18###WHO recommendations for the prevention and treatment of postpartum haemorrhage
12
and	grading	of	the	evidence 	and	observers	were	not	eligible	to	vote.	In	addition	to	
discussing	the	scientific	evidence	and	its	quality 	relevant	applicability	issues 	costs	
and	other	judgements	were	also	taken	into	consideration	when	formulating	the	final	
recommendations.
The strength of each recommendation was determined during the Technical Con -
sultation.	By	default 	the	strength	of	the	recommendations	discussed	was	aligned	
initially with the quality of the evidence (i.e.  at	the	start	of	the	discussion 	strong	
recommendations	were	based	on	evidence	of	‘moderate’ 	and	‘high’ 	quality 	while	
weak	recommendations	were	based	on	evidence	of	‘low’ 	and	‘very	low’ 	quality).	  
In	addition	to	the	quality	of	the	evidence 	the	following	factors	were	considered	
when	determining	the	final	recommendation	and	its	strength:	values	and	preferenc -
es 	the	magnitude	of	effect 	the	balance	of	benefits	versus	disadvantages 	resource	
usage 	and	feasibility.	Values	and	preferences 	resource	usage 	and	the	feasibility	of	
each	recommendation	were	based	on	the	experience	and	opinion	of	the	GDG	mem -
bers.	Balance	worksheets	were	used	to	note	and	synthesize	these	considerations	
(Annex	3 	Boxes	1	to	8)	and	record	the	reasons	for	changes	made	to	the	default	
strength of the recommendations.
Document preparation and peer review
Prior	to	the	 Technical	Consultation 	the	guideline	steering	group	prepared	a	prelimi -
nary version of this document using a guideline reporting template which had been 
developed	as	part	of	the	WHO’s	GREAT 	project.	 The	draft	guideline	was	reviewed	by	
Technical	Consultation	participants	at	the	meeting	in	Montreux.	During	the	meeting 	
the	draft	guideline	was	modified	in	line	with	participant	deliberation	and	comments.	
Feedback	received	during	the	preliminary	online	consultation	was	also	discussed	and	
incorporated	into	the	document	where	appropriate.	 After	the	meeting 	members	of	
the	guideline	steering	group	worked	to	ensure	that	a	revised	version	of	the	docu -
ment	accurately	reflected	the	deliberations	and	decisions	of	the	participants.	 The	
revised	draft	guideline	document	was	sent	to	two	external	peer	reviewers	and	their	
inputs were carefully evaluated by the guideline steering group and document revi -
sions	made	accordingly.	 The	guideline	steering	group	refrained	from	making	substan -
tive	changes	after	the	meeting	in	Montreux	to	the	guideline	scoping	(such	as	the	
further	expansion	of	the	guideline	scoping)	or	to	the	recommendations.	 The	revised	
version was returned electronically to those who had attended the Technical Consul -
tation for their approval.
3. Results
This guideline includes 32 recommendations for the prevention and treatment of 
PPH.	Seven	of	these	recommendations	are	new 	while	the	others	have	been	revised	
in light of new evidence. Most of the previous 2007 and 2009 recommendations 
remain	unchanged	in	essence 	despite	updates	to	the	evidence	base.	 The	wording	
of the previous recommendations has been revised to enhance the clarity of the 
guidance provided. The recommendations included in this guideline are based on 
a	total	of	22	Cochrane	systematic	reviews	summarized	in	70	GRADE	tables.	Boxes	
1 to 8 present the most up-to-date WHO recommendations for the prevention and 
treatment	of	PPH.	Where	applicable 	remarks	related	to	specific	recommendations	
are	also	shown	in	these	boxes	and	new	recommendations	are	marked	with	asterisks.	
Narrative summaries of evidence supporting the recommendations are presented 
###19###WHO recommendations for the prevention and treatment of postpartum haemorrhage
13
in	the	electronic	appendix	together	with	the	corresponding	GRADE	tables	(see	the	
“WHO recommendations for preventing and treating PPH: evidence base ” at  
www.who.int/reproductivehealth/publications/maternal_perinatal_health/  
9789241548502/en).	Box	9	presents	statements	related	to	topics	for	which 	accord -
ing	to	the	assessments	of	the	GDG 	there	was	insufficient	evidence	to	issue	a	recom -
mendation.	Balance	worksheets	summarizing	the	values 	preferences	and	judge -
ments	made	about	the	strength	of	the	recommendations	are	presented	in	 Annex	3 	
Boxes	1	to	8.
The	development	of	these	recommendations	involved	130	stakeholders	who	par -
ticipated	in	the	online	preliminary	survey	(representing	all	WHO	regions) 	and	25	
experts	who	participated	in	the	WHO	 Technical	Consultation.
Recommendations for PPH prevention
The contribution of each component of the ‘active management of the third stage of 
labour’	was	examined	in	light	of	new	available	evidence 	and	relevant	recommenda -
tions	were	made.	Box	1	presents	recommendations	concerning	the	use	of	uteroton -
ics for the prevention of PPH. All women giving birth should be offered uteroton -
ics	during	the	third	stage	of	labour	to	prevent	PPH	and	IM/IV	oxytocin	(10	IU)	is	
recommended as the uterotonic drug of choice. Other injectable uterotonics (i.e. 
ergometrine/methylergometrine 	or	the	fixed	drug	combination	of	oxytocin	and	
ergometrine)	and	misoprostol	are	recommended	as	alternatives	for	the	prevention	
of	PPH	in	settings	where	oxytocin	is	unavailable.	Box	2	contains	recommendations	
related to cord management and uterine massage. The importance of controlled 
cord	traction	(CCT)	was	revisited	because	of	new	evidence.	 This	intervention	is	now	
regarded	as	optional	in	settings	where	skilled	birth	attendants	are	available 	and	
is	contraindicated	in	settings	where	skilled	attendants	do	not	assist	with	births.	
Early cord clamping is generally contraindicated. Continuous uterine massage is 
not recommended as an intervention to prevent PPH for women who have received 
prophylactic	oxytocin 	because	the	massage	may	cause	maternal	discomfort 	re -
quire	a	dedicated	health	professional 	and	may	not	lead	to	a	reduction	of	blood	loss.	
However 	surveillance	of	the	uterine	tonus	through	abdominal	palpation	is	recom -
mended	for	all	women	for	the	early	identification	of	postpartum	uterine	atony.	 Table	
1 summarizes the recommendation status of the individual components of the active 
management	of	the	third	stage	of	labour.	In	summary 	the	GDG	considered	the	use	
of uterotonics as the main intervention within the active management of third stage 
of	labour	package.	In	this	context 	the	use	of	misoprostol	for	the	prevention	of	PPH	
by	community	health	care	workers	and	lay	health	workers	is	supported	in	settings	
where	skilled	birth	attendants	are	not	present.
Recommendations for reducing blood loss during the third stage of labour in caesar -
ean	sections	are	presented	in	Box	3.	Oxytocin	is	the	recommended	uterotonic	drug	
for the prevention of PPH in caesarean sections. Cord traction is recommended in 
preference to manual removal when assisting placental delivery in caesarean sec -
tions.
Recommendations for PPH treatment
The	use	of	uterotonics	(oxytocin	alone	as	the	first	choice)	plays	a	central	role	in	
the	treatment	of	PPH	(see	Boxes	4	and	5).	Uterine	massage	is	recommended	for	the	
treatment	of	PPH	as	soon	as	it	is	diagnosed	(see	Box	6)	and	the	initial	fluid	resus -
###20###WHO recommendations for the prevention and treatment of postpartum haemorrhage
14
citation	with	isotonic	crystalloids	is	recommended.	 The	use	of	tranexamic	acid	is	
advised in cases of refractory atonic bleeding or persistent trauma-related bleed -
ing	(see	Box	5).	 The	use	of	intrauterine	balloon	tamponade	is	recommended	for	
refractory	bleeding	or	if	uterotonics	are	unavailable.	Bimanual	uterine	compression 	
external	aortic	compression 	and	the	use	of	non-pneumatic	anti-shock	garments	are	
recommended as temporizing measures until substantive care is available. If there is 
persistent	bleeding	and	the	relevant	resources	are	available 	uterine	artery	emboli -
zation should be considered. If bleeding persists despite treatment with uterotonic 
drugs	and	other	conservative	interventions 	surgical	intervention	should	be	used	
without further delay.
If	the	third	stage	of	labour	lasts	more	than	30	minutes 	CCT 	and	IV/IM	oxytocin	  
(10	IU)	should	be	used	to	manage	the	retained	placenta.	If	the	placenta	is	retained	
and	bleeding	occurs 	the	manual	removal	of	the	placenta	should	be	expedited.	
Whenever	the	manual	removal	of	the	placenta	is	undertaken 	a	single	dose	of	pro -
phylactic	antibiotics	is	recommended	(see	Box	7).
The GDG also issued recommendations related to the organization of PPH care (see 
Box	8).	Health	facilities	delivering	maternity	services	should	adopt	formal	proto -
cols for the prevention and treatment of PPH and for patient referral. The use of 
PPH treatment simulations for pre-service and in-service training programmes was 
recommended.	Finally 	the	GDG	recommended	that	the	use	of	uterotonics	for	the	
prevention	of	PPH	should	be	monitored	and	a	specific	indicator	was	suggested.
The	GDG	found	insufficient	evidence	to	recommend	one	route	over	another	for	the	
prevention	of	PPH	with	oxytocin 	the	use	of	recombinant	factor	VIIa	for	the	treat -
ment	of	PPH 	intraumbilical	vein	injection	of	oxytocin	for	treatment	of	retained	
placenta 	and	the	antenatal	distribution	of	misoprostol.	 The	GDG	also	found	insuffi -
cient evidence to recommend self-administration for the prevention of PPH and the 
measurement	of	blood	loss	over	clinical	estimation	(see	Box	9).
###21###WHO recommendations for the prevention and treatment of postpartum haemorrhage
15
Box 1: Recommendations for the prevention of PPH – uterotonics
1. The use of uterotonics for the prevention of PPH during the third stage of labour is recom -
mended	for	all	births.	(Strong	recommendation 	moderate-quality	evidence)
2. Oxytocin	(10	IU 	IV/IM)	is	the	recommended	uterotonic	drug	for	the	prevention	of	PPH.	
(Strong	recommendation 	moderate-quality	evidence)
3. In	settings	where	oxytocin	is	unavailable 	the	use	of	other	injectable	uterotonics	(e.g.	er -
gometrine/methylergometrine	or	the	fixed	drug	combination	of	oxytocin	and	ergometrine)	
or	oral	misoprostol	(600  µg)	is	recommended.	(Strong	recommendation 	moderate-quality	
evidence)
4. In	settings	where	skilled	birth	attendants	are	not	present	and	oxytocin	is	unavailable 	the	
administration	of	misoprostol	(600  µg	PO)	by	community	health	care	workers	and	lay	health	
workers	is	recommended	for	the	prevention	of	PPH.	(Strong	recommendation 	moderate-
quality	evidence)
Remarks
•	Available	comparisons	are	limited 	but	a	significant	difference	between	the	benefits	of	oxytocin	and	
ergometrine	is	unlikely.	 These	recommendations	place	a	high	value	on	avoiding	the	adverse	effects	of	
ergometrine	and	assume	a	similar	benefit	from	using	oxytocin	and	ergometrine	for	the	prevention	of	
PPH. 
•	Caution	should	be	exercised	when	opting	for	ergot	derivatives	for	the	prevention	of	PPH	as	these	drugs	
have	clear	contraindications	in	women	with	hypertensive	disorders.	 Thus 	it	is	probably	safer	to	avoid	
the use of ergot derivatives in unscreened populations.
•	Misoprostol	(600	�g	PO)	was	regarded	by	the	GDG	as	an	effective	drug	for	the	prevention	of	PPH.	How- 	�g	PO)	was	regarded	by	the	GDG	as	an	effective	drug	for	the	prevention	of	PPH.	How-	PO)	was	regarded	by	the	GDG	as	an	effective	drug	for	the	prevention	of	PPH.	How -
ever 	the	GDG	considered	the	relative	benefits	of	oxytocin	compared	to	misoprostol	in	preventing	blood	
loss 	as	well	as	the	increased	adverse	effects	of	misoprostol	compared	to	oxytocin.	 The	GDG	acknowl -
edged	that	there	is	no	evidence	to	show	that	a	600  µg	dose	of	misoprostol	provides	greater	efficacy	over	
a	400�g	�g	dose.	Lower	doses	have	a	lower	side-effect	profi 	le	but	the	effi 	cacy	of	lower	doses	of	miso-�g	�g	dose.	Lower	doses	have	a	lower	side-effect	profi 	le	but	the	effi 	cacy	of	lower	doses	of	miso-	dose.	Lower	doses	have	a	lower	side-effect	profile	but	the	efficacy	of	lower	doses	of	miso -
prostol	has	not	been	evaluated	sufficiently.
•	The	recommendations	concerning	alternative	uterotonics	should	not	detract	from	the	objective	of	mak -
ing	oxytocin	as	widely	accessible	as	possible.
•	In view of past concerns regarding the community-level distribution of misoprostol and the potential 
for	serious	consequences	of	administration	before	birth 	the	GDG	places	emphasis	on	training	persons	
administering	misoprostol	and	monitoring	community	distribution	interventions	with	scientifically	sound	
methods and appropriate indicators.
###22###WHO recommendations for the prevention and treatment of postpartum haemorrhage
16
Box 2: Recommendations for the prevention of PPH – cord management and uterine massage
5. In	settings	where	skilled	birth	attendants	are	available 	CCT 	is	recommended	for	vaginal	
births if the care provider and the parturient woman regard a small reduction in blood loss 
and	a	small	reduction	in	the	duration	of	the	third	stage	of	labour	as	important.	(Weak	recom -
mendation 	high-quality	evidence)	
6.	In	settings	where	skilled	birth	attendants	are	unavailable 	CCT 	is	not	recommended.	(Strong	
recommendation 	moderate-quality	evidence)
7. Late	cord	clamping	(performed	approximately	1	to	3	minutes	after	birth)	is	recommended	
for	all	births	while	initiating	simultaneous	essential	newborn	care.	(Strong	recommendation 	
moderate-quality	evidence)
8. Early	cord	clamping	(<1	minute	after	birth)	is	not	recommended	unless	the	neonate	is	as -
phyxiated	and	needs	to	be	moved	immediately	for	resuscitation.	(Strong	recommendation 	
moderate-quality	evidence)
9. Sustained uterine massage is not recommended as an intervention to prevent PPH in women 
who	have	received	prophylactic	oxytocin.	(Weak	recommendation 	low-quality	evidence)
10. Postpartum	abdominal	uterine	tonus	assessment	for	early	identification	of	uterine	atony	is	
recommended	for	all	women.	(Strong	recommendation 	very-low-quality	evidence)
Remarks
•	Recommendations	5	and	6	are	based	on	a	large	RCT 	in	which	oxytocin	10	IU	was	used	for	the	prevention	
of	PPH	in	all	participants.	Based	on	this	evidence 	CCT 	was	regarded	as	safe	when	applied	by	skilled	
birth	attendants	as	it	provides	small	beneficial	effects	on	blood	loss	(average	reduction	of	11	ml	on	
blood	loss)	and	on	the	duration	of	the	third	stage	of	labour	(average	reduction	of	6	minutes).	 The	deci -
sion	to	implement	CCT 	in	the	context	of	a	prophylactic	uterotonic	drug	should	be	discussed	by	the	care	
provider and the woman herself. 
•	If	ergot	alkaloids	are	used	for	the	prevention	of	PPH 	then	CCT 	to	minimize	placenta	retention	is	re -
garded as essential.
•	There	is	insufficient	evidence	to	determine	the	benefit	or	risk	of	CCT 	when	used	in	conjunction	with	
misoprostol. 
•	CCT	is	the	first	intervention	to	treat	retained	placenta 	therefore	the	teaching	of	CCT 	in	medical	and	
midwifery curricula is essential.
•	The evidence base for recommendations for the timing of cord clamping includes both vaginal and cae -
sarean births. The GDG considers this recommendation to be equally important for caesarean sections.
•	Delayed clamping should be performed during the provision of essential newborn care. For essential 
newborn	care	and	resuscitation 	please	refer	to	the	WHO	guidelines	on	neonatal	resuscitation.	(10)	
•	The recommendations for the timing of cord clamping apply equally to preterm and term births. The 
GDG	considers	the	benefits	of	delayed	clamping	for	preterm	infants	to	be	particularly	important.
(Continued on next page)
###23###WHO recommendations for the prevention and treatment of postpartum haemorrhage
17
Box 2: Recommendations for the prevention of PPH – cord management and uterine massage
5. In	settings	where	skilled	birth	attendants	are	available 	CCT 	is	recommended	for	vaginal	
births if the care provider and the parturient woman regard a small reduction in blood loss 
and	a	small	reduction	in	the	duration	of	the	third	stage	of	labour	as	important.	(Weak	recom -
mendation 	high-quality	evidence)	
6.	In	settings	where	skilled	birth	attendants	are	unavailable 	CCT 	is	not	recommended.	(Strong	
recommendation 	moderate-quality	evidence)
7. Late	cord	clamping	(performed	approximately	1	to	3	minutes	after	birth)	is	recommended	
for	all	births	while	initiating	simultaneous	essential	newborn	care.	(Strong	recommendation 	
moderate-quality	evidence)
8. Early	cord	clamping	(<1	minute	after	birth)	is	not	recommended	unless	the	neonate	is	as -
phyxiated	and	needs	to	be	moved	immediately	for	resuscitation.	(Strong	recommendation 	
moderate-quality	evidence)
9. Sustained uterine massage is not recommended as an intervention to prevent PPH in women 
who	have	received	prophylactic	oxytocin.	(Weak	recommendation 	low-quality	evidence)
10. Postpartum	abdominal	uterine	tonus	assessment	for	early	identification	of	uterine	atony	is	
recommended	for	all	women.	(Strong	recommendation 	very-low-quality	evidence)
Remarks
•	Recommendations	5	and	6	are	based	on	a	large	RCT 	in	which	oxytocin	10	IU	was	used	for	the	prevention	
of	PPH	in	all	participants.	Based	on	this	evidence 	CCT 	was	regarded	as	safe	when	applied	by	skilled	
birth	attendants	as	it	provides	small	beneficial	effects	on	blood	loss	(average	reduction	of	11	ml	on	
blood	loss)	and	on	the	duration	of	the	third	stage	of	labour	(average	reduction	of	6	minutes).	 The	deci -
sion	to	implement	CCT 	in	the	context	of	a	prophylactic	uterotonic	drug	should	be	discussed	by	the	care	
provider and the woman herself. 
•	If	ergot	alkaloids	are	used	for	the	prevention	of	PPH 	then	CCT 	to	minimize	placenta	retention	is	re -
garded as essential.
•	There	is	insufficient	evidence	to	determine	the	benefit	or	risk	of	CCT 	when	used	in	conjunction	with	
misoprostol. 
•	CCT	is	the	first	intervention	to	treat	retained	placenta 	therefore	the	teaching	of	CCT 	in	medical	and	
midwifery curricula is essential.
•	The evidence base for recommendations for the timing of cord clamping includes both vaginal and cae -
sarean births. The GDG considers this recommendation to be equally important for caesarean sections.
•	Delayed clamping should be performed during the provision of essential newborn care. For essential 
newborn	care	and	resuscitation 	please	refer	to	the	WHO	guidelines	on	neonatal	resuscitation.	(10)	
•	The recommendations for the timing of cord clamping apply equally to preterm and term births. The 
GDG	considers	the	benefits	of	delayed	clamping	for	preterm	infants	to	be	particularly	important.•	Some	health	professionals	working	in	areas	of	high	HIV	prevalence	have	expressed	concern	regard -
ing delayed cord clamping as part of management of the third stage of labour. These professionals are 
concerned	that	during	placental	separation 	a	partially	detached	placenta	could	be	exposed	to	maternal	
blood and this could lead to a micro-transfusion of maternal blood to the baby. It has been demonstrat -
ed	that	the	potential	for	maternal-to-child	transmission	of	HIV	can	take	place	at	three	different	points	
in	time:	micro-transfusions	of	maternal	blood	to	the	fetus	during	pregnancy	(intra-uterine	HIV	transmis -
sion) 	exposure	to	maternal	blood	and	vaginal	secretions	when	the	fetus	passes	through	the	birth	canal	
in	vaginal	deliveries	(intra-partum	transmission) 	and	during	breastfeeding	(postnatal	infection).	For	this	
reason 	the	main	intervention	to	reduce	the	maternal-to-child	transmission	is	the	reduction	of	mater -
nal	viral	load	through	the	use	of	antiretroviral	drugs	during	pregnancy 	childbirth	and	postnatal	period.	
There is no evidence that delaying the cord clamping increases the possibility of HIV transmission from 
the mother to the newborn. Maternal blood percolates through the placental intervillous space through -
out	pregnancy	with	a	relatively	low	risk	of	maternal	fetal	transmission	before	delivery.	It	is	highly	un -
likely	that	separation	of	the	placenta	increases	exposure	to	maternal	blood 	and	is	highly	unlikely	that	
it	disrupts	the	fetal	placental	circulation	(i.e.	it	is	unlikely	that	during	placenta	separation	the	newborn	
circulation	is	exposed	to	maternal	blood).	 Thus 	the	proven	benefits	of	a	1	–	3	minute	delay	at	least	in	
clamping	the	cord	outweigh	the	theoretical 	and	unproven 	harms.	Late	cord	clamping	is	recommended	
even	among	women	living	with	HIV	or	women	with	unknown	HIV	status.
•	There	is	a	lack	of	evidence	regarding	the	role	of	uterine	massage	for	PPH	prevention	when	no	uterotonic	
drugs	are	used 	or	if	a	uterotonic	drug	other	than	oxytocin	is	used.	
•	Although	the	GDG	acknowledged	that	one	small	study	reported	that	sustained	uterine	massage	and	clot	
expulsion	were	associated	with	a	reduction	in	the	use	of	additional	uterotonics 	there	is	lack	of	robust	
evidence	supporting	other	benefits.	However 	the	GDG	considered	that	routine	and	frequent	uterine	
tone	assessment	remains	a	crucial	part	of	immediate	postpartum	care 	particularly	for	the	optimization	
of early PPH diagnosis.
•	Based	on	the	most	recent	evidence 	understanding	of	the	contribution	of	each	component	of	the	active	
management	of	the	third	stage	of	labour	package	has	evolved.	 The	GDG	considered	that	this	package	
has	a	primary	intervention:		the	use	of	an	uterotonic.	In	the	context	of	oxytocin	use 	CCT 	may	add	a	
small	benefit 	while	uterine	massage	may	add	no	benefit	for	the	prevention	of	PPH.	Early	cord	clamping	
is generally contraindicated.(Continued from previous page)
###24###WHO recommendations for the prevention and treatment of postpartum haemorrhage
18
Box 3: Recommendations for the prevention of PPH in caesarean sections
11. Oxytocin	(IV	or	IM)	is	the	recommended	uterotonic	drug	for	the	prevention	of	PPH	in	caesar -
ean	section.	(Strong	recommendation 	moderate-quality	evidence)
12. Cord traction is the recommended method for the removal of the placenta in caesarean sec -
tion.	(Strong	recommendation 	moderate-quality	evidence)
Remarks
•	The	GDG	noted	that 	in	terms	of	blood	loss 	there	was	not	enough	evidence	to	recommend	oxytocin	
infusion	over	IV	bolus	injection.	However 	due	to	concerns	regarding	adverse	haemodynamic	effects 	  
the	GDG	considered	that	if	an	IV	bolus	injection	is	used 	a	slow	injection	rate	is	preferred	and	a	rapid	
injection rate should be avoided. 
•	The	GDG	noted	that	the	combination	of	an	oxytocin	infusion	after	an	initial	IV	bolus	of	oxytocin	after	
caesarean delivery reduces the need for additional uterotonic agents but does not affect the overall  
occurrence of major obstetric haemorrhage. 
•	The GDG noted that carbetocin is associated with a reduction in the use of additional uterotonic agents 
but	with	no	difference	in	the	occurrence	of	major	obstetric	haemorrhage.	In	addition 	the	GDG	noted	
that	the	use	of	carbetocin	is	considerably	more	expensive	than	oxytocin.	 This	remark	is	equally	appli -
cable to vaginal deliveries.Table	1:	Recommendation	status	of	the	individual	components	of	the	active	management	  
of	the	third	stage	of	labour 	based	on	who	delivers	the	intervention
Skilled  
birth attendantNon-skilled  
birth attendantSelf-administered
Uterotonics In favour In favour Research*
Early cord clamping Against Against Against
Controlled cord traction Conditional** Against Against
Continuous uterine massage Against*** Against Research****
* Distribution of misoprostol during the antenatal period for self-administration during the third stage of labour
**	Small	reduction	in	blood	loss	and	in	the	length	of	the	third	stage;	adoption	based	on	the	values	and	preferences	of	the	
woman and the health care provider
***	Routine	uterine	tone	assessment	remains	a	vital	part	of	clinical	decision	making	and	should	be	practised	during	the	third	
stage of labour
**** Self-administered uterine massage in the absence of uterotonics
###25###WHO recommendations for the prevention and treatment of postpartum haemorrhage
19
Box 4: Recommendations for the treatment of PPH – uterotonics
13. Intravenous	oxytocin	is	the	recommended	uterotonic	drug	for	the	treatment	of	PPH.	(Strong	
recommendation 	moderate	quality	evidence)
14. If	intravenous	oxytocin	is	unavailable 	or	if	the	bleeding	does	not	respond	to	oxytocin 	the	use	
of	intravenous	ergometrine 	oxytocin-ergometrine	fixed	dose 	or	a	prostaglandin	drug	(includ -
ing	sublingual	misoprostol 	800	 µg)	is	recommended.	(Strong	recommendation 	low-quality	
evidence)
Remarks
•	The	GDG	recommended	IV	oxytocin	as	the	first	line	uterotonic	drug	for	the	treatment	of	PPH 	including	
when	women	have	already	received	this	drug	for	the	prophylaxis	of	PPH.
•	The	GDG	recognized	that	IV	oxytocin	may	not	be	available	in	all	settings.	It	encourages	health	care	
decision-makers	in	these	settings	to	strive	to	make	oxytocin	available.
•	In	settings	where	IV	oxytocin	is	unavailable	to	women	who	have	received	prophylactic	IM	oxytocin	during	
the	third	stage	of	labour 	the	GDG	considered	misoprostol	to	be	a	valid	alternative.
•	If	PPH	prophylaxis	with	misoprostol	has	been	administered	and	if	injectable	uterotonics	are	unavailable 	
there	is	insufficient	evidence	to	guide	further	misoprostol	dosing	and	consideration	must	be	given	to	the	
risk	of	potential	toxicity.
•	There	is	no	added	benefit	to	offering	misoprostol	simultaneously	to	women	receiving	oxytocin	for	the	
treatment	of	PPH	(i.e.	adjunct	misoprostol).
•	The	GDG	noted	that	the	two	largest	trials	of	misoprostol	for	the	treatment	of	PPH	(Winikoff	2010 	Blum	
2010)	reported	the	use	of	a	800 	μg	dose administered sublingually. The majority of the GDG members 
agreed that 800 	μg	is	an	acceptable	sublingual	misoprostol	 dose	for	the	treatment	of	PPH 	though	some	
members	of	the	GDG	expressed	concern	related	to	the	risk	of	hyperpyrexia	associated	with	this	dosage.
•	If	IV	oxytocin	has	been	used	for	the	treatment	of	PPH	and	the	bleeding	does	not	stop 	there	is	a	paucity	
of data to recommend preferences for second line uterotonic drug treatment. Decisions in such situ -
ations	must	be	guided	by	the	experience	of	the	provider 	the	availability	of	the	drugs 	and	by	known	
contraindications.
•	In	situations	in	which	IM	oxytocin	can	be	administered	and	there	is	no	possibility	of	IV	treatment	with	
ergot	alkaloids/injectable	prostaglandins 	there	is	a	paucity	of	data	to	recommend	a	preference	of	IM	
oxytocin	over	misoprostol	or	other	uterotonics.	Decisions	in	such	situations	must	be	guided	by	the	expe -
rience	of	the	provider 	the	availability	of	the	drugs 	and	by	known	contraindications.
Box 5: Recommendations for the treatment of PPH – fluid resuscitation and tr anexamic acid
15. The use of isotonic crystalloids is recommended in preference to the use of colloids for the 
intravenous	fluid	resuscitation	of	women	with	PPH.	(Strong	recommendation 	low-quality	
evidence)
16.	The	use	of	tranexamic	acid	is	recommended	for	the	treatment	of	PPH	if	oxytocin	and	other	
uterotonics fail to stop the bleeding or if it is thought that the bleeding may be partly due to 
trauma.	(Weak	recommendation 	moderate-quality	evidence)
Remarks
•	Evidence	for	the	recommendation	of	tranexamic	acid	was	extrapolated	from	the	literature	on	surgery	
and	trauma 	which	shows	tranexamic	acid	to	be	a	safe	option	for	the	treatment	of	trauma-related	
bleeding. 
###26###WHO recommendations for the prevention and treatment of postpartum haemorrhage
20
Box 6: Recommendations for the treatment of PPH – manoeuvres and other procedures
17. Uterine	massage	is	recommended	for	the	treatment	of	PPH.	(Strong	recommendation 	very-
low-quality	evidence)
18. If	women	do	not	respond	to	treatment	using	uterotonics 	or	if	uterotonics	are	unavailable 	
the use of intrauterine balloon tamponade is recommended for the treatment of PPH due to 
uterine	atony.	(Weak	recommendation 	very-low-quality	evidence)
19. If	other	measures	have	failed	and	if	the	necessary	resources	are	available 	the	use	of	uter -
ine	artery	embolization	is	recommended	as	a	treatment	for	PPH	due	to	uterine	atony.	(Weak	
recommendation 	very-low-quality	evidence)
20. If bleeding does not stop in spite of treatment using uterotonics and other available conserva -
tive	interventions	(e.g.	uterine	massage 	balloon	tamponade) 	the	use	of	surgical	interven -
tions	is	recommended.	(Strong	recommendation 	very-low-quality	evidence)
21. The use of bimanual uterine compression is recommended as a temporizing measure until 
appropriate care is available for the treatment of PPH due to uterine atony after vaginal 
delivery.	(Weak	recommendation 	very-low-quality	evidence)
22. The	use	of	external	aortic	compression	for	the	treatment	of	PPH	due	to	uterine	atony	after	
vaginal birth is recommended as a temporizing measure until appropriate care is available. 
(Weak	recommendation 	very-low-quality	evidence)
23. The	use	of	non-pneumatic	anti-shock	garments	is	recommended	as	a	temporizing	measure	
until	appropriate	care	is	available.	(Weak	recommendation 	low-quality	evidence)
24. The	use	of	uterine	packing	is	not	recommended	for	the	treatment	of	PPH	due	to	uterine	
atony	after	vaginal	birth.	(Weak	recommendation 	very-low-quality	evidence)
Remarks
•	The GDG noted that the application of these interventions requires training and that maternal discom -
fort and complications associated with these procedures have been reported.
•	Uterine	massage	as	a	therapeutic	measure	is	defined	as	the	rubbing	of	the	uterus	achieved	through	the	
manual massaging of the abdomen. This is typically sustained until the bleeding stops or the uterus con -
tracts. The GDP considered that uterine massage should be started once PPH has been diagnosed.
•	The	initial	rubbing	of	the	uterus	and	expression	of	blood	clots	are	not	regarded	as	therapeutic	uterine	
massage.
•	When	rating	the	recommendation	#17	as	‘strong’ 	the	low	cost	and	safety	of	uterine	massage	were	
taken	into	account.
•	The use of balloon tamponade was considered by the GDG to be a measure that can potentially avoid 
surgery	or	as	a	temporizing	measure	while	awaiting	transfer	to	a	higher	level	facility.	 The	GDG	acknowl -
edges	that	balloon	tamponade	can	be	obtained	with	specific	devices	as	well	as	with	lower	cost	adapta -
tions 	including	those	based	on	the	use	of	condoms	and	surgical	gloves.
•	The	GDG	noted	that	uterine	artery	embolization	requires	significant	resources 	in	terms	of	the	cost	of	
the	treatment 	the	facilities 	and	the	training	of	health	care	workers.
•	The	GDG	noted	that	conservative	surgical	approaches	should	be	tried	first.	If	these	do	not	work 	they	
should	be	followed	by	more	invasive	procedures.	Compression	sutures 	for	example 	may	be	attempted	
as	a	first	intervention 	and	if	these	fail 	then	uterine 	utero-ovarian	and	hypogastric	vessel	ligation	may	
be	tried.	If	life-threatening	bleeding	continues	even	after	ligation 	then	a	subtotal	(otherwise	known	as	
supracervical)	or	total	hysterectomy	should	be	performed.
•	The	GDG	acknowledged	that	the	level	of	health	care	provider	skills	will	play	a	role	in	the	selection	and	
sequence of the surgical interventions.
(Continued on next page)
###27###WHO recommendations for the prevention and treatment of postpartum haemorrhage
21
•	External	aortic	compression	has	long	been	recommended	as	a	potential	life-saving	technique 	and	me -
chanical	compression	of	the	aorta 	if	successful 	slows	blood	loss.	 The	GDG	placed	a	high	value	on	this	
procedure as a temporizing measure in the treatment of PPH.
•	The	GDG	noted	that	research	evaluating	the	potential	benefits	and	harms	of	non-pneumatic	anti-shock	
garments	is	ongoing.	Based	on	the	evidence	available 	the	GDG	regarded	non-pneumatic	anti-shock	gar -
ments as a temporizing measure while transfer is awaited.
•	The	GDG	noted	that	there	was	no	evidence	of	benefit	of	uterine	packing	and	placed	a	high	value	on	
concerns regarding its potential harm.
Box 7: Recommendations for the treatment of retained placenta
25. If	the	placenta	is	not	expelled	spontaneously 	the	use	of	additional	oxytocin	(10  IU 	IV/IM)	in	
combination	with	controlled	cord	traction	is	recommended.	(Weak	recommendation 	very-
low-quality	evidence)
26.	The use of ergometrine for the management of a retained placenta is not recommended as 
this	may	cause	tetanic	uterine	contractions	which	may	delay	the	expulsion	of	the	placenta.	
(Weak	recommendation 	very-low-quality	evidence)
27. The	use	of	prostaglandin	E2	alpha	(dinoprostone	or	sulprostone)	in	the	management	of	re -
tained	placenta	is	not	recommended.	(Weak	recommendation 	very-low-quality	evidence)
28. A	single	dose	of	antibiotics	(ampicillin	or	first-generation	cephalosporin)	is	recommended	if	
manual	removal	of	the	placenta	is	practised.	(Weak	recommendation 	very-low-quality	evi -
dence)
Remarks
•	The GDG found no empirical evidence to support recommending the use of uterotonics for the manage -
ment of a retained placenta in the absence of haemorrhage. The above recommendation was reached 
by consensus.
•	The	WHO	guide 	“ Managing complications in pregnancy and childbirth ”	(WHO 	2007) 	states	that	if	a	
placenta	is	not	expelled	within	30	minutes	after	the	delivery	of	a	baby 	the	woman	should	be	diagnosed	
as	having	a	retained	placenta.	Since	there	is	no	evidence	for	or	against	this	definition 	the	delay	used	
before this condition is diagnosed is left to the judgement of the clinician.
•	The	same	WHO	guide	also	suggests	that	in	the	absence	of	haemorrhage 	the	woman	should	be	observed	
for	a	further	30	minutes	after	the	initial	30	minutes 	before	the	manual	removal	of	the	placenta	is	at -
tempted.	 The	GDG	noted	that	spontaneous	expulsion	of	the	placenta	can	still	occur 	even	in	the	absence	
of bleeding. A conservative approach is therefore advised and the timing of the manual removal of the 
placenta	as	a	definitive	treatment	is	left	to	the	judgement	of	the	clinician.
•	The	recommendation	regarding	the	use	of	prostaglandin	E2	is	informed	by	a	lack	of	evidence	on	this	
question	and	also	by	concerns	related	to	adverse	events 	particularly	cardiac	events.
•	Direct	evidence	of	the	value	of	antibiotic	prophylaxis	after	the	manual	removal	of	the	placenta	was	not	
available.	 The	GDG	considered	indirect	evidence	of	the	benefit	of	prophylactic	antibiotics	from	studies	
of	caesarean	section	and	abortion 	as	well	as	observational	studies	of	other	intrauterine	manipulations.
•	Current	practice	suggests	that	ampicillin	or	first-generation	cephalosporins	may	be	administered	when	
the manual removal of the placenta is performed.
•	This	question	was	identified	as	a	research	priority	for	settings	in	which	prophylactic	antibiotics	are	not	
routinely administered and those with low infectious morbidity. (Continued from previous page)
###28###WHO recommendations for the prevention and treatment of postpartum haemorrhage
22
Box 8: Health Systems and Organization of Care recommendations for the prevention and 
treatment of PPH
29. The use of formal protocols by health facilities for the prevention and treatment of PPH is 
recommended.	(Weak	recommendation 	moderate-quality	evidence)
30. The use of formal protocols for referral of women to a higher level of care is recommended 
for	health	facilities.	(Weak	recommendation 	very-low-quality	evidence)
31. The use of simulations of PPH treatment is recommended for pre-service and in-service train -
ing	programmes.	(Weak	recommendation 	very-low-quality	evidence)
32. Monitoring the use of uterotonics after birth for the prevention of PPH is recommended as 
a	process	indicator	for	programmatic	evaluation.	(Weak	recommendation 	very-low-quality	
evidence)
Remarks
•	Routine	and	frequent	uterine	tone	assessment	remains	a	crucial	part	of	immediate	postpartum	care 	
particularly for optimizing the early diagnosis of PPH.
•	The	GDG	acknowledged	that	the	implementation	of	formal	protocols	is	a	complex	process	which	will	
require the local adaptation of general guidelines.
•	The	GDG	placed	a	high	value	on	the	costs	of	simulation	programmes	and	acknowledged	that	there	are	
different	types	of	simulation	programmes.	Some	programmes	are	hi-tech 	computerized	and	costly	while	
others	are	less	expensive	and	more	likely	to	be	affordable	in	low-	and	middle-income	countries.	 The	
GDG	identified	improvement	in	communication	between	health	care	providers	and	patients	and	their	
family members as an important priority in the training of health care providers in PPH management.
•	The GDG recommended monitoring the use of prophylactic uterotonics. This recommendation is based 
on	experience	from	other	areas	of	health	care 	particularly	child	health 	where	content-based	health	
indicators are common and regarded as useful for programmatic purposes. The suggested indicator is 
calculated as the number of women receiving prophylactic uterotonic drugs after birth divided by all 
women giving birth.
###29###WHO recommendations for the prevention and treatment of postpartum haemorrhage
23
Box 9: Statements related to topics for which there is insufficient ev idence to issue a recom -
mendation
A.	 There	is	insufficient	evidence	to	recommend	one	oxytocin	route	over	another	for	the	prevention	of	PPH.
B.	 There	is	insufficient	evidence	to	recommend	the	use	of	recombinant	factor	VIIa	for	the	treatment	of	
PPH.
C.	 There	is	insufficient	evidence	to	recommend	the	use	of	intraumbilical	vein	injection	of	oxytocin	as	a	
treatment for retained placenta.
D.	 There	is	insufficient	evidence	to	recommend	the	antenatal	distribution	of	misoprostol	to	pregnant	
women for self-administration for the prevention of PPH. 
E.	 There	is	insufficient	evidence	to	recommend	the	measurement	of	blood	loss	over	clinical	estimation	of	
blood loss.
Remarks
•	The	GDG	noted	that	there	are	three	ongoing	trials	in	which	the	IV	and	IM	routes	for	oxytocin	administra -
tion are being compared for the prevention of PPH.
•	The	GDG	considered	there	to	be	insufficient	evidence	to	recommend	the	use	of	oxytocin	infusion	over	
IV	bolus	injection	with	regard	to	blood	loss.	However 	in	light	of	concerns	about	the	potential	adverse	
haemodynamic	effects 	the	GDG	considered	that	if	IV	bolus	injection	treatment	is	to	be	used	then	a	
slow injection rate is preferred and a rapid injection rate should be avoided.
•	In	the	context	of	PPH 	the	GDP 	considered	that	the	use	of	recombinant	factor	VIIa	should	be	limited	to	
women	with	specific	haematological	indications.	 The	group	regarded	the	recombinant	factor	VIIa	as	a	
potentially	life-saving	drug 	but	noted	that	it	is	also	associated	with	life-threatening	side-effects.	More -
over 	recombinant	factor	VIIa	is	expensive	and	may	be	difficult	to	administer.
•	The	GDG	acknowledged	that	while	there	is	a	paucity	of	data	to	recommend	intraumbilical	vein	injec -
tion	of	oxytocin	as	a	treatment	for	retained	placenta 	the	procedure	itself	has	not	been	shown	to	cause	
harm	and	demonstrates	a	non-significant	trend	towards	a	lower	risk	of	requiring	the	manual	removal	of	
the placenta.
•	The	GDG	acknowledged	that	a	number	of	countries	have	embarked	on	community-level	programmes	of	
misoprostol	distribution	and	considered	that	this	should	be	done	in	the	context	of	research	(where	reli -
able	data	on	coverage 	safety	and	health	outcomes	can	be	collected).
•	The GDG noted that all trials included in the systematic review on the measurement of blood loss were 
conducted in developed countries and views the applicability of this evidence to low- and middle-
income countries as very uncertain.
###30###WHO recommendations for the prevention and treatment of postpartum haemorrhage
24
4. Research implications
The	GDG	identified	important	knowledge	gaps	that	need	to	be	addressed	through	
primary	research.	In	this	guideline 	recommendations	based	on	evidence	quality	that	
was	rated	as	‘very	low’ 	or	‘low’ 	require	further	research.	Conversely 	further	re -
search	is	not	a	priority	for	those	recommendations	based	on	evidence	of	‘moderate’ 	
or	‘high’ 	quality.	Knowledge	gaps	identified	in	the	2007	and	2009	WHO	documents	
were	also	reviewed.	 The	identified	knowledge	gaps	were	prioritized	by	considering	
whether	such	research	would	be	feasible 	innovative 	original 	likely	to	promote	
equity 	and	contribute	to	the	reduction	of	the	burden	of	PPH.	 The	main	barriers	to	
scaling	up	the	intervention	were	also	considered	in	this	prioritization	exercise.
The GDG noted that research is either planned or ongoing for some of the research 
priorities	identified.	However 	there	is	no	certainty	that	these	investigations	will	
provide	conclusive	results 	and	the	topics	have	therefore	remained	listed	as	re -
search priorities in this document.
Key research priority
In	settings	where	the	use	of	injectable	uterotonics	is	not	feasible 	what	are	the	ef -
fects of antenatal distribution of misoprostol to pregnant women for self-administra -
tion during the third stage of labour?
Other research questions 
•	What	is	the	minimum	effective	dose	of	oxytocin	for	the	prevention	of	PPH?	
•	What	are	the	effects	of	IM	oxytocin	(versus	IV	oxytocin)	for	the	prevention	of	
PPH?
•	Can	oxytocin	be	administered	safely	by	unskilled	attendants?
•	What	are	the	effects	of	buccal	and	sublingual	use	of	oxytocin	for	the	prevention	
of PPH?
•	What is the minimum effective dose of misoprostol for the prevention of PPH?
•	What is the minimum effective dose of misoprostol for the treatment of PPH?
•	What	are	effects	and	safety	of	misoprostol	as	treatment	for	PPH 	in	women	who	
received	misoprostol	as	PPH	prophylaxis?	
•	Should	misoprostol	be	used	in	addition	to	oxytocin	for	PPH	prevention?
•	What	are	the	effects	of	tranexamic	acid	in	PPH	treatment?
•	What are the effects of uterine massage for the prevention of PPH?
•	What	are	the	effects	of	uterine	massage	to	prevent	PPH 	where	oxytocin	is	not	
available? 
•	What are the effects of uterine balloon or tamponade in the treatment of PPH?
•	What	are	the	effects	of	uterine	massage	to	prevent	PPH 	where	only	misoprostol	
is available? 
###31###WHO recommendations for the prevention and treatment of postpartum haemorrhage
25
•	What	are	the	effects	of	prophylactic	antibiotics	after	manual	extraction	of	the	
placenta as part of the treatment of retained placenta?
•	What are the effects of the use of misoprostol for the treatment of retained 
placenta?
•	What	are	effects	of	ergometrine	(in	combination	or	not	with	oxytocin)	after	
caesarean section for the prevention of PPH?
•	What	is	the	optimal	time	for	cord	clamping	in	the	context	of	physiologic	and	ac -
tive management of third stage of labour?
•	What	is	the	appropriate	time	to	administer	oxytocin	for	PPH	prevention 	rela -
tive	to	cord	clamping	and	placental	delivery?	(i.e.	before/after	cord	clamping 	
before/after	placenta	delivery)
•	Which clinical consequences of blood loss are of greatest value for the diagnosis 
and treatment of PPH?
•	What	is	the	role	of	lay	health	workers	in	management	of	PPH?
5. Dissemination and implementation of 
the guideline
The ultimate goal of this guideline is to improve the quality of care and health 
outcomes related to PPH. Therefore the dissemination and implementation of this 
guideline	are	crucial	steps	that	should	be	undertaken	by	the	international	commu -
nity and local health care services. The WHO Department of Reproductive Health 
and	Research	has	adopted	a	formal	knowledge-to-action	framework	for	the	dissemi -
nation 	adaptation	and	implementation	of	guidelines	(8).	In	addition	to	this	frame -
work 	a	list	of	priority	actions	was	established	during	the	WHO	 Technical	Consulta -
tion which will be used by the WHO and other partners to foster the dissemination 
and	implementation	of	this	guideline	(EB	Box	2).
Guideline dissemination and evaluation
The recommendations in this guideline will be disseminated through a broad net -
work	of	international	partners 	including	WHO	country	and	regional	offices 	min -
istries	of	health 	WHO	collaborating	centres 	other	United	Nations	agencies 	and	
non-governmental organizations. They will also be published on the WHO website 
and	in	The	WHO	Reproductive	Health	Library	(11) 	where	they	will	be	accompanied	
by an independent critical appraisal based on the AGREE instrument (Appraisal of 
Guidelines	Research	and	Evaluation)	which	can	be	found	at	http://www.agreecol -
laboration.org/instrument.	 A	policy	brief	will	also	be	developed	for	a	wide	range	of	
policy-makers 	programme	managers	and	clinicians 	and	then	disseminated	through	
WHO	country	offices.
Guideline implementation
The successful introduction of evidence-based policies related to the prevention and 
management of PPH into national programmes and health care services depends on 
well-planned and participatory consensus-driven processes of adaptation and imple -
###32###WHO recommendations for the prevention and treatment of postpartum haemorrhage
26
mentation.	 These	processes	may	include	the	development	or	revision	of	existing	
national guidelines or protocols based on this document.
The recommendations contained in the present guideline should be adapted into 
locally-appropriate	documents	that	are	able	to	meet	the	specific	needs	of	each	
country	and	health	service.	Modifications	to	the	recommendations 	where	necessary 	
should	be	limited	to	weak	recommendations	and	justifications	for	any	changes	made	
in	an	explicit	and	transparent	manner.	
An enabling environment should be created for the use of these recommendations 
(for	example 	by	widening	the	availability	of	uterotonics) 	including	changes	in	the	
behaviour of health care practitioners to enable the use of evidence-based practic -
es. Local professional societies may play important roles in this process and an all-
inclusive	and	participatory	process	should	be	encouraged.	 The	WHO’s	Department	of	
Reproductive	Health	and	Research	has	published	specific	guidance	on	the	introduc -
tion	of	the	WHO’s	reproductive	health	guidelines	and	tools	in	national	programmes.
6. Applicability issues
Anticipated impact on the organization of care and  
resources
The evidence-based prevention and management of PPH can be achieved with the 
use	of	relatively	inexpensive	drugs.	However 	the	GDG	noted	that	the	following	is -
sues should be considered before the recommendations made in this current guide -
line	are	applied:
•	Women	should	not	be	left	alone	during	the	first	hours	after	delivery	of	the	baby	
and the placenta
•	In	settings	where	oxytocin	is	used 	attention	should	be	paid	to	the	oxytocin	cold	
chain	(i.e.	the	requirements	of	a	temperature-controlled	supply	chain)
•	Health services adopting late cord clamping should also adopt strategies to iden -
tify	(and	if	necessary	to	treat)	neonatal	jaundice
Monitoring and evaluating the guideline implementation
The implementation of the recommendations in this guideline should be monitored 
at	the	health-service	level.	Interrupted	time	series 	clinical	audits	or	criterion-based	
clinical audits could be used to obtain relevant data related to the management of 
PPH.	Clearly-defined	review	criteria	and	indicators	are	needed	and	these	could	be	
associated with locally-agreed targets. The GDG strongly recommends that the cov -
erage of prophylactic uterotonics be used as a process indicator for the monitoring 
and prevention of PPH.
•	Prophylactic	Uterotonic	Coverage	Indicator:	 The	suggested	indicator	is	calculat -
ed as the number of women receiving prophylactic uterotonics during the third 
stage of labour divided by all women giving birth
This	indicator	provides	an	overall	assessment	of	adherence	to	a	key	recommendation	
included	in	this	guideline.	 The	use	of	other	locally-agreed	and	more	specific	indica -
###33###WHO recommendations for the prevention and treatment of postpartum haemorrhage
27
tors	(e.g.	the	assessment	of	the	use	of	specific	uterotonics)	may	be	necessary	to	
obtain a more complete assessment of the quality of care related to the prevention 
and	treatment	of	PPH.	WHO	has	developed	specific	guidance	for	evaluating	the	qual -
ity	of	care	for	severe	maternal	complications	(including	PPH)	based	on	the	near-miss	
and	criterion-based	clinical	audit	concepts	(13).
7. Updating the guideline
This	guideline	will	be	updated	in	2017	or	following	the	identification	of	new	evi -
dence that indicates a need to revise these recommendations. WHO welcomes sug -
gestions regarding additional questions for inclusion in the updated guideline. Please 
e-mail	your	suggestions	to:	reproductivehealth@who.int.
References
1. Khan	KS 	Wojdyla	D 	Say	L 	Gülmezoglu	 AM 	Van	Look	PF.	WHO	analysis	of	causes	
of	maternal	death:	 A	systematic	review.	 Lancet.	2006;367	(9516):	1066–74.	
2. Campbell	OM 	Graham	WJ.	Lancet	Maternal	Survival	Series	Steering	Group.	
Strategies	for	reducing	maternal	mortality:	getting	on	with	what	works.	 Lancet . 
2006;368	(9543):	1284–99.	
3. World Health Organization. World Health Organization multicountry survey on 
maternal and newborn health .	Geneva:	WHO;	2012	
4. World Health Organization. Managing complication in pregnancy and child­
birth: a guide for midwives and doctors .	Geneva:	WHO;	2000.	 Available	from:	
http://www.who.int/reproductivehealth/publications/maternal_perinatal_	
health/9241545879/en/index.html	
5. Begley	CM 	Gyte	GM 	Devane	D 	McGuire	W 	Weeks	 A.	Active	versus	expect -
ant management for women in the third stage of labour. Cochrane Data ­
base Syst Rev. 	2011(11).	 Available	from:	http://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/
doi/10.1002/14651858.CD007412.pub3/abstract
6.	World Health Organization. WHO recommendations for the prevention of post ­
partum haemorrhage .	Geneva:	WHO;	2007.	 Available	from:	http://whqlibdoc.
who.int/hq/2007/WHO_MPS_07.06_eng.pdf	
7. World Health Organization. WHO guidelines for the management of postpar ­
tum haemorrhage and retained placenta .	Geneva:	WHO;	2009.	 Available	from:	
http://whqlibdoc.who.int/publications/2009/9789241598514_eng.pdf	
8. World Health Organization. Knowledge to action framework and the G.R.E.A.T 
project.	Geneva:	WHO;	2010.	 Available	from:	http://www.who.int/reproduc-
tivehealth/topics/best_practices/greatproject_KTAframework/en/index.html	
9. World Health Organization. WHO Handbook for guideline development.  
Geneva:	WHO;	2012.	 Available	from:	http://apps.who.int/iris/bitstre
am/10665/75146/1/9789241548441_eng.pdf
###34###WHO recommendations for the prevention and treatment of postpartum haemorrhage
28
10. World Health Organization. Guidelines on basic newborn resuscitation.  
Geneva:	WHO;	2012.	 Available	from:	http://apps.who.int/iris/bitstre
am/10665/75157/1/9789241503693_eng.pdf
11. World Health Organization. The WHO Reproductive Health Library. 	Geneva:	WHO.	
Available	from:	www.who.int/rhl
12. World Health Organization.  Introducing WHO’s sexual and reproductive health 
guidelines and tools into national programmes: principles and process of adap­
tation and implementation. 	Geneva:	WHO;	2007.	 Available	from:	http://www.	
who.int/reproductivehealth/publications/general/RHR_07_09/en/index.html	
13. World Health Organization. Evaluating the quality of care for severe preg ­
nancy complications: the WHO near ­miss approach for maternal health. 
Geneva:	WHO;	2011.	 Available	from:	http://whqlibdoc.who.int/publica -
tions/2011/9789241502221_eng.pdf	
The full list of references that support the recommendations is included in the docu -
ment entitled “WHO recommendations for post partum haemorrhage: evidence base” 
and	can	be	accessed	online	at:	www.who.int/reproductivehealth/publications/mater -
nal_perinatal_health/9789241548502/en/
###35###WHO recommendations for the prevention and treatment of postpartum haemorrhage
29
Annex 1. External experts  WHO staff involved in the 
preparation of the guideline  and summary of decla -
rations of interest
A. Guideline Development Group (participants in the WHO Technical Consultation)
Members (WHO External Advisers) 
Professor Hany Abdel-Aleem
Professor of Obstetrics and Gynecology
Women’s	Health	Center
Assiut	University	Hospital
Assiut
Egypt
Dr Catherine Deneux-Tharaux
Medical Epidemiologist and Researcher
Inserm	U953
Recherche épidémiologique en santé périnatale et 
santé des femmes et des enfants
Hôpital Tenon
Paris
France
Dr Bukola Fawole
Senior Lecturer
Department of Obstetrics and Gynaecology
College of Medicine
University	of	Ibadan
Ibadan
Nigeria
Dr Atf Ghérissi
Maître	Assistante	Universitaire	en	Sciences	de	
l’Education	appliquées	à	la	Santé
Ecole Supérieure des Sciences et Techniques de la 
Santé	Université	
Tunis-El Manar
Tunisia
Ms Gill Gyte
Research Associate  
Cochrane Pregnancy and Childbirth Group  
University	of	Liverpool  
Liverpool	Women’s	Hospital	NHS	 Trust 
Crown Street  
United	KingdomDr Justus Hofmeyr
Director
Effective	Care	Research	Unit	
University	of	the	Witwatersrand/	  
University	of	Fort	Hare/	  
Eastern Cape Department of Health
Amalinda Drive
Private Bag X9047
East London 
Eastern Cape 5201
South Africa
Dr Simon Lewin
Senior Researcher
Global	Health	Unit
Norwegian	Knowledge	Centre	for	the	Health	
Services	&	Medical	Research	Council 	South	 Africa
Oslo
Norway
Professor Syeda Batool Mazhar
Professor of Obstetrics and Gynaecology
Mother	and	Child	Health	Centre	(MCH)	Pakistan	
Institute of Medical Sciences
Islamabad
Pakistan
Professor Suneeta Mittal
Professor of Obstetrics and Gynecology 
Officer-in-Charge	of	the	WHO	Collaborating	
Centre for Research on Human Reproduction
All India Institute of Medical Sciences
New Delhi
India
Dr Enrique Oyarzun
Chairman 
Department Obstetrics and Gynaecology
Facultad de Medicina
Pontificia	Universidad	Católica	de	Chile
Santiago
Chile
###36###WHO recommendations for the prevention and treatment of postpartum haemorrhage
30
Dr Zahida Qureshi
Senior Lecturer
Department of Obstetrics and Gynaecology
University	of	Nairobi
Nairobi
Kenya
Professor Hamid Rushwan
Chief	Executive  
International Federation of Gynecology and Obstetrics
FIGO	House 	Suite	3
Waterloo	Court 	10	 Theed	Street
London 
SE1 8ST
United	Kingdom
Dr Jeffrey Michael Smith
Director 	Maternal	Health 	MCHIP
Washington
USA
Dr Tran Son Thach
Perinatal Epidemiologist
Australian Research Centre for Health of Women and 
Babies
Discipline of Obstetrics and Gynaecology
The	University	of	 Adelaide
Women’s	and	Children’s	Hospital
King	William	Road
Australia
Dr Dilys Walker
Associate Professor
Department of Global Health and Obstetrics & 
Gynecology
University	of	Washington
Ninth	&	Jefferson	Building 	Harborview	Medical	Center  
Seattle 	WA
USAObservers
Ms Deborah Armbruster
Senior Maternal and Newborn Health Advisor
Center	for	Population 	Health	and	Nutrition
United	States	 Agency	for	International	Development
Washington D.C.
USA
Ms Jennifer Blum
Gynuity Health Projects
New	York	
USA
Ms Claire Glenton
Senior Researcher
Nordic	Cochrane	Centre 	Norwegian	Branch/	  
Global	Health	Unit	
Norwegian	Knowledge	Centre	for	the	Health	Services
Oslo
Norway
Dr Sarah Rosenbaum 
Norwegian	Knowledge	Centre	for	the	 Health Services
Oslo
Norway
Ms Mary Ellen Stanton
Senior Reproductive Health Advisor
Center	for	Population 	Health	and	Nutrition
United	States	 Agency	for	International	Development
Washington D.C.
USA
Ms Clare Waite
Project Manager
Misoprostol for Post-Partum Haemorrhage in Low 
Resource Settings
International Federation of Gynecology and 
Obstetrics
FIGO House
London 
United	Kingdom
Dr Beverly Winikoff
Gynuity Health Projects
New	York
USA	
###37###WHO recommendations for the prevention and treatment of postpartum haemorrhage
31
WHO Regional and Country Offices
AFRO
Dr Alicia Carbonell
National	Professional	Officer
Making	Pregnancy	Safer	and	Reproductive	Health
Bureau	de	pays	de	l’OMS	  
PO	Box	CP 	377	 
Maputo 
Mozambique
SEARO
Dr Narimah Awin
Medical	Officer
Making	Pregnancy	Safer	and	Reproductive	Health
Department of Family and Research
World Health Organization  
Regional	Office	for	South-East	 Asia 
World	Health	House 	Indraprastha	Estate  
Mahatma Gandhi Marg  
New Delhi 110 002
India
WPRO
Dr Hiromi Obara
Medical	Officer
Maternal and Child Health and Nutrition
Building Healthy Communities and Populations
World Health Organization 
Regional	Office	for	the	Western	Pacific
P.O.	Box	2932  
1000 Manila  
Philippines 
External Secretariat
Dr Edgardo Abalos
Centro Rosarino de Estudios Perinatales	(CREP)
Rosario 
Argentina
Dr Virginia Diaz
Centro	Rosarino	de	Estudios	Perinatales	(CREP)
Rosario 
Argentina
Dr Natasha Hezelgrave
Academic	Clinical	Fellow 	Obstetrics	and	Gynaecology
Kings	College	London
Guy’s	&	St	 Thomas’ 	NHS	Foundation	 Trust
London
United	KingdomWHO Secretariat
Dr Michael Mbizvo
Director 
Department of Reproductive Health and Research
Dr Ana Pilar Betran
Medical	Officer
Improving Maternal and Perinatal Health
Research 	Evidence	and	Norms
Department of Reproductive Health and Research
Dr Metin Gülmezoglu
Lead Specialist
Improving Maternal and Perinatal Health
Research 	Evidence	and	Norms
Department of Reproductive Health and Research
Dr Matthews Mathai
Coordinator
Epidemiology 	Monitoring	and	Evaluation
Department of 
Maternal 	Newborn 	Child	and	 Adolescent	
Health	(MCA)
Dr João Paulo Souza
Medical	Officer
Improving	Maternal	and	Perinatal	Health	Research 	
Evidence and Norms
Department of Reproductive Health and Research
Dr Joshua Vogel
Improving	Maternal	and	Perinatal	Health	Research 	
Evidence and Norms
Department of Reproductive Health and Research
Dr Mariana Widmer
Technical	officer
Improving	Maternal	and	Perinatal	Health	Research 	
Evidence and Norms
Department of Reproductive Health and Research
B. Guideline Steering Group
Dr A. Metin Gülmezoglu (WHO)
Dr Matthews Mathai (WHO)
Dr João Paulo Souza (WHO)
Dr Edgardo Abalos (CREP)
Dr Virginia Diaz (CREP)
Dr Natasha Hezelgrave (KCL)
###38###WHO recommendations for the prevention and treatment of postpartum haemorrhage
32
C. Summary of the declarations of interest: Members of the GDG
Name Region Country Declaration of Conflict 
of interest  
(please indicate ‘yes’ or 
‘no’ for each section)Advice from  
Legal Department 
(please indicate 
‘yes’ or ‘no’)Meeting 
restriction: 
Please indicate 
see below for 
explanation)
A B C D
Professor Hany 
Abdel-AleemEMRO Egypt Y N         N N N N
Dr Catherine 
Deneux-TharauxEURO France Y N N N N N
Dr	Bukola	Fawole AFRO Nigeria N N N N N N
Dr Atf Ghérissi EMRO Tunisia N N N N N N
Ms Gill Gyte EURO UK Y N N N N N
Dr	Justus	Hofmeyr AFRO South 
AfricaY N N N N N
Dr Simon Lewin EURO Norway/
South 
AfricaN N N N N N
Professor Syeda 
Batool MazharEMRO Pakistan N N N N N N
Dr Enrique 
OyarzunAMRO Chile N N N N N N
Dr	Zahida	Qureshi AFRO Kenya Y N N N N N
Professor 
Hamid Rushwan EURO Sudan/UK N N N N N N
Dr	Jeffrey	Michael	
SmithAMRO USA N N N N N N
Dr Tran Son Thach WPRO Vietnam	/
AustraliaY N N N N N
Dr	Dilys	Walker AMRO USA Y N N N N N
A:	Involved	in	academic	work	related	to	the	topic	of	the	meeting/guideline
B:	Declared	any	commercial	financial	interest 	related	to	the	topic	of	the	meeting/guideline
C:	Declared	any	commercial	financial	interest 	 not directly 	related	to	the	topic	of	the	meeting/guideline
D:	Declared	non-commercial	interest	or	grants	related	to	the	topic	of	the	meeting/guideline
###39###WHO recommendations for the prevention and treatment of postpartum haemorrhage
33
Annex 2. Critical outcomes for decision making
PPH prevention
Critical outcomes
Fewer maternal deaths
Fewer	events	of	severe	PPH	(blood	loss	>1000	ml)
Less use of blood transfusion
Important outcomes
Fewer admissions to intensive care unit
Blood	loss	≥500	ml
Additional uterotonics
Mean blood loss
Postpartum anaemia
Breastfeeding
Less anaemia in infancy
Any side effect of intervention
Any side effect requiring treatment
Nausea
Vomiting
Diarrhoea
Headache
Abdominal pain
High blood pressure
Shivering
Maternal	temperature	≥38	 °C
Maternal	temperature	≥40	 °CPPH treatment
Critical outcomes
Additional	blood	loss	≥500	ml
Additional	blood	loss	≥1000	ml
Blood transfusion
Additional uterotonics
Invasive non-surgical interventions
Surgical	interventions	(including	hysterectomy)
Maternal	temperature	≥40	 °C
Procedure-related complications
Infections
Severe morbidity
Maternal transfer
Reduction	of	time	from	decision-making	to	implemen -
tation
Availability of drugs and treatment
Important outcomes
Accuracy in blood loss assessment
Mean blood loss
Postpartum anaemia
Additional	non-surgical	interventions	(e.g.	external	
aortic	compression	and	compression	garments)
Artery embolization
Nausea 	vomiting	or	shivering
Maternal	temperature	≥38	 °C
Delayed initiation of breastfeeding
Prolonged hospitalization
###40###WHO recommendations for the prevention and treatment of postpartum haemorrhage
34
Annex 3: Summary of the considerations related to the strength of the recommen -
dations (Balance Worksheets)
Box	1.	Summary	of	considerations	related	to	the	strength	of	the	recommendations	(Recommendations	1–5)	
Recommendation 1 2 3 4 5
Intervention Uterotonics for PPH 
preventionOxytocin for PPH prevention Other uterotonics for PPH 
preventionMisoprostol by community 
health workers for PPH 
preventionCCT by skilled birth 
attendants for PPH 
prevention
Quality	of	the	
evidenceHigh
 Moderate
 Low
 Very low High
 Moderate
 Low
 Very low High
 Moderate
 Low
 Very low High
 Moderate
 Low
 Very low High
 Moderate
 Low
 Very low
Values and 
preferences	No	significant	variability
	Significant	variability	No	significant	variability
	Significant	variability	No	significant	variability
	Significant	variability	No	significant	variability
	Significant	variability	No	significant	variability
	Significant	variability
Absolute 
magnitude of 
effect Large effect (RR>2 or 
RR<0.5)
	Small	effect	(0.5<RR<2) Large effect (RR>2 or 
RR<0.5)
	Small	effect	(0.5<RR<2) Large effect (RR>2 or 
RR<0.5)
	Small	effect	(0.5<RR<2) Large effect (RR>2 or 
RR<0.5)
	Small	effect	(0.5<RR<2) Large effect (RR>2 or 
RR<0.5)
	Small	effect	(0.5<RR<2)
Balance of 
benefits	versus	
disadvantages	Benefits	outweigh	
disadvantages
	Benefits	and	disadvantages	
are balanced
 Disadvantages outweigh 
benefits	Benefits	outweigh	
disadvantages
	Benefits	and	disadvantages	
are balanced
 Disadvantages outweigh 
benefits	Benefits	outweigh	
disadvantages
	Benefits	and	disadvantages	
are balanced
 Disadvantages outweigh 
benefits	Benefits	outweigh	
disadvantages
	Benefits	and	disadvantages	
are balanced
 Disadvantages outweigh 
benefits	Benefits	outweigh	
disadvantages
	Benefits	and	disadvantages	
are balanced
 Disadvantages outweigh 
benefits
Resource use  Less resource intensive
 More resource intensive Less resource intensive
 More resource intensive Less resource intensive
 More resource intensive Less resource intensive
 More resource intensive Less resource intensive
 More resource intensive
Feasibility 	Yes 	globally
	Yes 	conditionally	Yes 	globally
	Yes 	conditionally	Yes 	globally
	Yes 	conditionally	Yes 	globally
	Yes 	conditionally	Yes 	globally
	Yes 	conditionally
Recommendation 
direction In favour of the 
intervention
 Against the intervention In favour of the 
intervention
 Against the intervention In favour of the 
intervention
 Against the intervention In favour of the 
intervention
 Against the intervention In favour of the 
intervention
 Against the intervention
Overall	ranking  Strong recommendation
	Weak	recommendation Strong recommendation
	Weak	recommendation Strong recommendation
	Weak	recommendation Strong recommendation
	Weak	recommendation Strong recommendation
	Weak	recommendation
###41###WHO recommendations for the prevention and treatment of postpartum haemorrhage
35
Annex 3: Summary of the considerations related to the strength of the recommen -
dations (Balance Worksheets)
Box	1.	Summary	of	considerations	related	to	the	strength	of	the	recommendations	(Recommendations	1–5)	
Recommendation 1 2 3 4 5
Intervention Uterotonics for PPH 
preventionOxytocin for PPH prevention Other uterotonics for PPH 
preventionMisoprostol by community 
health workers for PPH 
preventionCCT by skilled birth 
attendants for PPH 
prevention
Quality	of	the	
evidenceHigh
 Moderate
 Low
 Very low High
 Moderate
 Low
 Very low High
 Moderate
 Low
 Very low High
 Moderate
 Low
 Very low High
 Moderate
 Low
 Very low
Values and 
preferences	No	significant	variability
	Significant	variability	No	significant	variability
	Significant	variability	No	significant	variability
	Significant	variability	No	significant	variability
	Significant	variability	No	significant	variability
	Significant	variability
Absolute 
magnitude of 
effect Large effect (RR>2 or 
RR<0.5)
	Small	effect	(0.5<RR<2) Large effect (RR>2 or 
RR<0.5)
	Small	effect	(0.5<RR<2) Large effect (RR>2 or 
RR<0.5)
	Small	effect	(0.5<RR<2) Large effect (RR>2 or 
RR<0.5)
	Small	effect	(0.5<RR<2) Large effect (RR>2 or 
RR<0.5)
	Small	effect	(0.5<RR<2)
Balance of 
benefits	versus	
disadvantages	Benefits	outweigh	
disadvantages
	Benefits	and	disadvantages	
are balanced
 Disadvantages outweigh 
benefits	Benefits	outweigh	
disadvantages
	Benefits	and	disadvantages	
are balanced
 Disadvantages outweigh 
benefits	Benefits	outweigh	
disadvantages
	Benefits	and	disadvantages	
are balanced
 Disadvantages outweigh 
benefits	Benefits	outweigh	
disadvantages
	Benefits	and	disadvantages	
are balanced
 Disadvantages outweigh 
benefits	Benefits	outweigh	
disadvantages
	Benefits	and	disadvantages	
are balanced
 Disadvantages outweigh 
benefits
Resource use  Less resource intensive
 More resource intensive Less resource intensive
 More resource intensive Less resource intensive
 More resource intensive Less resource intensive
 More resource intensive Less resource intensive
 More resource intensive
Feasibility 	Yes 	globally
	Yes 	conditionally	Yes 	globally
	Yes 	conditionally	Yes 	globally
	Yes 	conditionally	Yes 	globally
	Yes 	conditionally	Yes 	globally
	Yes 	conditionally
Recommendation 
direction In favour of the 
intervention
 Against the intervention In favour of the 
intervention
 Against the intervention In favour of the 
intervention
 Against the intervention In favour of the 
intervention
 Against the intervention In favour of the 
intervention
 Against the intervention
Overall	ranking  Strong recommendation
	Weak	recommendation Strong recommendation
	Weak	recommendation Strong recommendation
	Weak	recommendation Strong recommendation
	Weak	recommendation Strong recommendation
	Weak	recommendation
Box	2.	Summary	of	considerations	related	to	the	strength	of	the	recommendations	(Recommendations	6–10)	
Recommendation 6 7 8 9 10
Intervention CCT by unskilled birth 
attendants for PPH 
preventionLate cord clamping for PPH 
preventionEarly cord clamping for PPH 
preventionSustained uterine massage 
for PPH preventionPostpartum abdominal 
assessment of uterine tonus
Quality	of	the
evidence High
 Moderate
 Low
 Very low High
 Moderate
 Low
 Very low High
 Moderate
 Low
 Very low High
 Moderate
 Low
 Very low High
 Moderate
 Low
 Very low
Values and 
preferences	No	significant	variability
	Significant	variability	No	significant	variability
	Significant	variability	No	significant	variability
	Significant	variability	No	significant	variability
	Significant	variability	No	significant	variability
	Significant	variability
Absolute 
magnitude of 
effect Large effect (RR>2 or 
RR<0.5)
	Small	effect	(0.5<RR<2) Large effect (RR>2 or 
RR<0.5)
	Small	effect	(0.5<RR<2) Large effect (RR>2 or 
RR<0.5)
	Small	effect	(0.5<RR<2) Large effect (RR>2 or 
RR<0.5)
	Small	effect	(0.5<RR<2) Large effect (RR>2 or 
RR<0.5)
	Small	effect	(0.5<RR<2)
Balance of 
benefits	versus	
disadvantages	Benefits	outweigh	
disadvantages
	Benefits	and	disadvantages	
are balanced
 Disadvantages outweigh 
benefits	Benefits	outweigh	
disadvantages
	Benefits	and	disadvantages	
are balanced
 Disadvantages outweigh 
benefits	Benefits	outweigh	
disadvantages
	Benefits	and	disadvantages	
are balanced
 Disadvantages outweigh 
benefits	Benefits	outweigh	
disadvantages
	Benefits	and	disadvantages	
are balanced
 Disadvantages outweigh 
benefits	Benefits	outweigh	
disadvantages
	Benefits	and	disadvantages	
are balanced
 Disadvantages outweigh 
benefits
Resource use  Less resource intensive
 More resource intensive Less resource intensive
 More resource intensive Less resource intensive
 More resource intensive Less resource intensive
 More resource intensive Less resource intensive
 More resource intensive
Feasibility 	Yes 	globally
	Yes 	conditionally	Yes 	globally
	Yes 	conditionally	Yes 	globally
	Yes 	conditionally	Yes 	globally
	Yes 	conditionally	Yes 	globally
	Yes 	conditionally
Recommendation 
direction In favour of the 
intervention
 Against the intervention In favour of the 
intervention
 Against the intervention In favour of the 
intervention
 Against the intervention In favour of the 
intervention
 Against the intervention In favour of the 
intervention
 Against the intervention
Overall	ranking  Strong recommendation
	Weak	recommendation Strong recommendation
	Weak	recommendation Strong recommendation
	Weak	recommendation Strong recommendation
	Weak	recommendation Strong recommendation
	Weak	recommendation
###42###WHO recommendations for the prevention and treatment of postpartum haemorrhage
36
Box	3.	Summary	of	considerations	related	to	the	strength	of	the	recommendations	(Recommendations	11–15)	
Recommendation 11 12 13 14 15
Intervention Oxytocin for PPH prevention 
in CSCCT for PPH prevention in 
CSOxytocin for PPH treatment Other uterotonic drugs for 
PPH treatmentIsotonic crystalloids for PPH 
treatment
Quality	of	the	
evidence High
 Moderate
 Low
 Very low High
 Moderate
 Low
 Very low High
 Moderate
 Low
 Very low High
 Moderate
 Low
 Very low High
 Moderate
 Low
 Very low
Values and 
preferences	No	significant	variability
	Significant	variability	No	significant	variability
	Significant	variability	No	significant	variability
	Significant	variability	No	significant	variability
	Significant	variability	No	significant	variability
	Significant	variability
Absolute 
magnitude of 
effect Large effect (RR>2 or 
RR<0.5)
	Small	effect	(0.5<RR<2) Large effect (RR>2 or 
RR<0.5)
	Small	effect	(0.5<RR<2) Large effect (RR>2 or 
RR<0.5)
	Small	effect	(0.5<RR<2) Large effect (RR>2 or 
RR<0.5)
	Small	effect	(0.5<RR<2) Large effect (RR>2 or 
RR<0.5)
	Small	effect	(0.5<RR<2)
Balance of 
benefits	versus	
disadvantages	Benefits	outweigh	
disadvantages
	Benefits	and	disadvantages	
are balanced
 Disadvantages outweigh 
benefits	Benefits	outweigh	
disadvantages
	Benefits	and	disadvantages	
are balanced
 Disadvantages outweigh 
benefits	Benefits	outweigh	
disadvantages
	Benefits	and	disadvantages	
are balanced
 Disadvantages outweigh 
benefits	Benefits	outweigh	
disadvantages
	Benefits	and	disadvantages	
are balanced
 Disadvantages outweigh 
benefits	Benefits	outweigh	
disadvantages
	Benefits	and	disadvantages	
are balanced
 Disadvantages outweigh 
benefits
Resource use  Less resource intensive
 More resource intensive Less resource intensive
 More resource intensive Less resource intensive
 More resource intensive Less resource intensive
 More resource intensive Less resource intensive
 More resource intensive
Feasibility 	Yes 	globally
	Yes 	conditionally	Yes 	globally
	Yes 	conditionally	Yes 	globally
	Yes 	conditionally	Yes 	globally
	Yes 	conditionally	Yes 	globally
	Yes 	conditionally
Recommendation 
direction In favour of the 
intervention
 Against the intervention In favour of the 
intervention
 Against the intervention In favour of the 
intervention
 Against the intervention In favour of the 
intervention
 Against the intervention In favour of the 
intervention
 Against the intervention
Overall	ranking  Strong recommendation
	Weak	recommendation Strong recommendation
	Weak	recommendation Strong recommendation
	Weak	recommendation Strong recommendation
	Weak	recommendation Strong recommendation
	Weak	recommendation
###43###WHO recommendations for the prevention and treatment of postpartum haemorrhage
37
Box	3.	Summary	of	considerations	related	to	the	strength	of	the	recommendations	(Recommendations	11–15)	
Recommendation 11 12 13 14 15
Intervention Oxytocin for PPH prevention 
in CSCCT for PPH prevention in 
CSOxytocin for PPH treatment Other uterotonic drugs for 
PPH treatmentIsotonic crystalloids for PPH 
treatment
Quality	of	the	
evidence High
 Moderate
 Low
 Very low High
 Moderate
 Low
 Very low High
 Moderate
 Low
 Very low High
 Moderate
 Low
 Very low High
 Moderate
 Low
 Very low
Values and 
preferences	No	significant	variability
	Significant	variability	No	significant	variability
	Significant	variability	No	significant	variability
	Significant	variability	No	significant	variability
	Significant	variability	No	significant	variability
	Significant	variability
Absolute 
magnitude of 
effect Large effect (RR>2 or 
RR<0.5)
	Small	effect	(0.5<RR<2) Large effect (RR>2 or 
RR<0.5)
	Small	effect	(0.5<RR<2) Large effect (RR>2 or 
RR<0.5)
	Small	effect	(0.5<RR<2) Large effect (RR>2 or 
RR<0.5)
	Small	effect	(0.5<RR<2) Large effect (RR>2 or 
RR<0.5)
	Small	effect	(0.5<RR<2)
Balance of 
benefits	versus	
disadvantages	Benefits	outweigh	
disadvantages
	Benefits	and	disadvantages	
are balanced
 Disadvantages outweigh 
benefits	Benefits	outweigh	
disadvantages
	Benefits	and	disadvantages	
are balanced
 Disadvantages outweigh 
benefits	Benefits	outweigh	
disadvantages
	Benefits	and	disadvantages	
are balanced
 Disadvantages outweigh 
benefits	Benefits	outweigh	
disadvantages
	Benefits	and	disadvantages	
are balanced
 Disadvantages outweigh 
benefits	Benefits	outweigh	
disadvantages
	Benefits	and	disadvantages	
are balanced
 Disadvantages outweigh 
benefits
Resource use  Less resource intensive
 More resource intensive Less resource intensive
 More resource intensive Less resource intensive
 More resource intensive Less resource intensive
 More resource intensive Less resource intensive
 More resource intensive
Feasibility 	Yes 	globally
	Yes 	conditionally	Yes 	globally
	Yes 	conditionally	Yes 	globally
	Yes 	conditionally	Yes 	globally
	Yes 	conditionally	Yes 	globally
	Yes 	conditionally
Recommendation 
direction In favour of the 
intervention
 Against the intervention In favour of the 
intervention
 Against the intervention In favour of the 
intervention
 Against the intervention In favour of the 
intervention
 Against the intervention In favour of the 
intervention
 Against the intervention
Overall	ranking  Strong recommendation
	Weak	recommendation Strong recommendation
	Weak	recommendation Strong recommendation
	Weak	recommendation Strong recommendation
	Weak	recommendation Strong recommendation
	Weak	recommendation
Box	4.	Summary	of	considerations	related	to	the	strength	of	the	recommendations	(Recommendations	16–20)	
Recommendation 16 17 18 19 20
Intervention Tranexamic acid for PPH 
treatmentUterine massage for PPH 
treatmentIntrauterine balloon 
tamponade for PPH 
treatmentUterine artery embolization 
for PPH treatmentSurgical interventions for 
PPH treatment
Quality	of	the	
evidence High
 Moderate
 Low
 Very low High
 Moderate
 Low
 Very low High
 Moderate
 Low
 Very low High
 Moderate
 Low
 Very low High
 Moderate
 Low
 Very low
Values and 
preferences	No	significant	variability
	Significant	variability	No	significant	variability
	Significant	variability	No	significant	variability
	Significant	variability	No	significant	variability
	Significant	variability	No	significant	variability
	Significant	variability
Absolute 
magnitude of 
effect Large effect (RR>2 or 
RR<0.5)
	Small	effect	(0.5<RR<2) Large effect (RR>2 or 
RR<0.5)
	Small	effect	(0.5<RR<2) Large effect (RR>2 or 
RR<0.5)
	Small	effect	(0.5<RR<2) Large effect (RR>2 or 
RR<0.5)
	Small	effect	(0.5<RR<2) Large effect (RR>2 or 
RR<0.5)
	Small	effect	(0.5<RR<2)
Balance of 
benefits	versus	
disadvantages	Benefits	outweigh	
disadvantages
	Benefits	and	disadvantages	
are balanced
 Disadvantages outweigh 
benefits	Benefits	outweigh	
disadvantages
	Benefits	and	disadvantages	
are balanced
 Disadvantages outweigh 
benefits	Benefits	outweigh	
disadvantages
	Benefits	and	disadvantages	
are balanced
 Disadvantages outweigh 
benefits	Benefits	outweigh	
disadvantages
	Benefits	and	disadvantages	
are balanced
 Disadvantages outweigh 
benefits	Benefits	outweigh	
disadvantages
	Benefits	and	disadvantages	
are balanced
 Disadvantages outweigh 
benefits
Resource use  Less resource intensive
 More resource intensive Less resource intensive
 More resource intensive Less resource intensive
 More resource intensive Less resource intensive
 More resource intensive Less resource intensive
 More resource intensive
Feasibility 	Yes 	globally
	Yes 	conditionally	Yes 	globally
	Yes 	conditionally	Yes 	globally
	Yes 	conditionally	Yes 	globally
	Yes 	conditionally	Yes 	globally
	Yes 	conditionally
Recommendation 
direction In favour of the 
intervention
 Against the intervention In favour of the 
intervention
 Against the intervention In favour of the 
intervention
 Against the intervention In favour of the 
intervention
 Against the intervention In favour of the 
intervention
 Against the intervention
Overall	ranking  Strong recommendation
	Weak	recommendation Strong recommendation
	Weak	recommendation Strong recommendation
	Weak	recommendation Strong recommendation
	Weak	recommendation Strong recommendation*
	Weak	recommendation
###44###WHO recommendations for the prevention and treatment of postpartum haemorrhage
38
Box	5.	Summary	of	considerations	related	to	the	strength	of	the	recommendations	(Recommendations	21–25)	
Recommendation 21 22 23 24 25
Intervention Bimanual uterine 
compression for PPH 
treatmentExternal aortic compression 
for PPH treatmentNon-pneumatic anti-shock 
garment for PPH treatmentUterine packing for PPH 
treatmentUterotonics and CCT for 
retained placenta
Quality	of	the	
evidence High
 Moderate
 Low
 Very low High
 Moderate
 Low
 Very low High
 Moderate
 Low
 Very low High
 Moderate
 Low
 Very low High
 Moderate
 Low
 Very low
Values and 
preferences	No	significant	variability
	Significant	variability	No	significant	variability
	Significant	variability	No	significant	variability
	Significant	variability	No	significant	variability
	Significant	variability	No	significant	variability
	Significant	variability
Absolute 
magnitude of 
effect Large effect (RR>2 or 
RR<0.5)
	Small	effect	(0.5<RR<2) Large effect (RR>2 or 
RR<0.5)
	Small	effect	(0.5<RR<2) Large effect (RR>2 or 
RR<0.5)
	Small	effect	(0.5<RR<2) Large effect (RR>2 or 
RR<0.5)
	Small	effect	(0.5<RR<2) Large effect (RR>2 or 
RR<0.5)
	Small	effect	(0.5<RR<2)
Balance of 
benefits	versus	
disadvantages	Benefits	outweigh	
disadvantages
	Benefits	and	disadvantages	
are balanced
 Disadvantages outweigh 
benefits	Benefits	outweigh	
disadvantages
	Benefits	and	disadvantages	
are balanced
 Disadvantages outweigh 
benefits	Benefits	outweigh	
disadvantages
	Benefits	and	disadvantages	
are balanced
 Disadvantages outweigh 
benefits	Benefits	outweigh	
disadvantages
	Benefits	and	disadvantages	
are balanced
 Disadvantages outweigh 
benefits	Benefits	outweigh	
disadvantages
	Benefits	and	disadvantages	
are balanced
 Disadvantages outweigh 
benefits
Resource use  Less resource intensive
 More resource intensive Less resource intensive
 More resource intensive Less resource intensive
 More resource intensive Less resource intensive
 More resource intensive Less resource intensive
 More resource intensive
Feasibility 	Yes 	globally
	Yes 	conditionally	Yes 	globally
	Yes 	conditionally	Yes 	globally
	Yes 	conditionally	Yes 	globally
	Yes 	conditionally	Yes 	globally
	Yes 	conditionally
Recommendation 
direction In favour of the 
intervention
 Against the intervention In favour of the 
intervention
 Against the intervention In favour of the 
intervention
 Against the intervention In favour of the 
intervention
 Against the intervention In favour of the 
intervention
 Against the intervention
Overall	ranking  Strong recommendation
	Weak	recommendation Strong recommendation
	Weak	recommendation Strong recommendation
	Weak	recommendation Strong recommendation
	Weak	recommendation Strong recommendation
	Weak	recommendation
###45###WHO recommendations for the prevention and treatment of postpartum haemorrhage
39
Box	5.	Summary	of	considerations	related	to	the	strength	of	the	recommendations	(Recommendations	21–25)	
Recommendation 21 22 23 24 25
Intervention Bimanual uterine 
compression for PPH 
treatmentExternal aortic compression 
for PPH treatmentNon-pneumatic anti-shock 
garment for PPH treatmentUterine packing for PPH 
treatmentUterotonics and CCT for 
retained placenta
Quality	of	the	
evidence High
 Moderate
 Low
 Very low High
 Moderate
 Low
 Very low High
 Moderate
 Low
 Very low High
 Moderate
 Low
 Very low High
 Moderate
 Low
 Very low
Values and 
preferences	No	significant	variability
	Significant	variability	No	significant	variability
	Significant	variability	No	significant	variability
	Significant	variability	No	significant	variability
	Significant	variability	No	significant	variability
	Significant	variability
Absolute 
magnitude of 
effect Large effect (RR>2 or 
RR<0.5)
	Small	effect	(0.5<RR<2) Large effect (RR>2 or 
RR<0.5)
	Small	effect	(0.5<RR<2) Large effect (RR>2 or 
RR<0.5)
	Small	effect	(0.5<RR<2) Large effect (RR>2 or 
RR<0.5)
	Small	effect	(0.5<RR<2) Large effect (RR>2 or 
RR<0.5)
	Small	effect	(0.5<RR<2)
Balance of 
benefits	versus	
disadvantages	Benefits	outweigh	
disadvantages
	Benefits	and	disadvantages	
are balanced
 Disadvantages outweigh 
benefits	Benefits	outweigh	
disadvantages
	Benefits	and	disadvantages	
are balanced
 Disadvantages outweigh 
benefits	Benefits	outweigh	
disadvantages
	Benefits	and	disadvantages	
are balanced
 Disadvantages outweigh 
benefits	Benefits	outweigh	
disadvantages
	Benefits	and	disadvantages	
are balanced
 Disadvantages outweigh 
benefits	Benefits	outweigh	
disadvantages
	Benefits	and	disadvantages	
are balanced
 Disadvantages outweigh 
benefits
Resource use  Less resource intensive
 More resource intensive Less resource intensive
 More resource intensive Less resource intensive
 More resource intensive Less resource intensive
 More resource intensive Less resource intensive
 More resource intensive
Feasibility 	Yes 	globally
	Yes 	conditionally	Yes 	globally
	Yes 	conditionally	Yes 	globally
	Yes 	conditionally	Yes 	globally
	Yes 	conditionally	Yes 	globally
	Yes 	conditionally
Recommendation 
direction In favour of the 
intervention
 Against the intervention In favour of the 
intervention
 Against the intervention In favour of the 
intervention
 Against the intervention In favour of the 
intervention
 Against the intervention In favour of the 
intervention
 Against the intervention
Overall	ranking  Strong recommendation
	Weak	recommendation Strong recommendation
	Weak	recommendation Strong recommendation
	Weak	recommendation Strong recommendation
	Weak	recommendation Strong recommendation
	Weak	recommendation
Box	6.	Summary	of	considerations	related	to	the	strength	of	the	recommendations	(Recommendations	26–30)	
Recommendation 26 27 28 29 30
Intervention Ergometrine for retained 
placentaProstaglandin E2 alpha for 
retained placentaAntibiotics with manual 
removal for retained 
placentaFormal protocols for PPH 
treatmentFormal protocols for patient 
referral
Quality	of	the	
evidence High
 Moderate
 Low
 Very low High
 Moderate
 Low
 Very low High
 Moderate
 Low
 Very low High
 Moderate
 Low
 Very low High
 Moderate
 Low
 Very low
Values and 
preferences	No	significant	variability
	Significant	variability	No	significant	variability
	Significant	variability	No	significant	variability
	Significant	variability	No	significant	variability
	Significant	variability	No	significant	variability
	Significant	variability
Absolute 
magnitude of 
effect Large effect (RR>2 or 
RR<0.5)
	Small	effect	(0.5<RR<2) Large effect (RR>2 or 
RR<0.5)
	Small	effect	(0.5<RR<2) Large effect (RR>2 or 
RR<0.5)
	Small	effect	(0.5<RR<2) Large effect (RR>2 or 
RR<0.5)
	Small	effect	(0.5<RR<2) Large effect (RR>2 or 
RR<0.5)
	Small	effect	(0.5<RR<2)
Balance of 
benefits	versus	
disadvantages	Benefits	outweigh	
disadvantages
	Benefits	and	disadvantages	
are balanced
 Disadvantages outweigh 
benefits	Benefits	outweigh	
disadvantages
	Benefits	and	disadvantages	
are balanced
 Disadvantages outweigh 
benefits	Benefits	outweigh	
disadvantages
	Benefits	and	disadvantages	
are balanced
 Disadvantages outweigh 
benefits	Benefits	outweigh	
disadvantages
	Benefits	and	disadvantages	
are balanced
 Disadvantages outweigh 
benefits	Benefits	outweigh	
disadvantages
	Benefits	and	disadvantages	
are balanced
 Disadvantages outweigh 
benefits
Resource use  Less resource intensive
 More resource intensive Less resource intensive
 More resource intensive Less resource intensive
 More resource intensive Less resource intensive
 More resource intensive Less resource intensive
 More resource intensive
Feasibility 	Yes 	globally
	Yes 	conditionally	Yes 	globally
	Yes 	conditionally	Yes 	globally
	Yes 	conditionally	Yes 	globally
	Yes 	conditionally	Yes 	globally
	Yes 	conditionally
Recommendation 
direction In favour of the 
intervention
 Against the intervention In favour of the 
intervention
 Against the intervention In favour of the 
intervention
 Against the intervention In favour of the 
intervention
 Against the intervention In favour of the 
intervention
 Against the intervention
Overall	ranking  Strong recommendation
	Weak	recommendation Strong recommendation
	Weak	recommendation Strong recommendation
	Weak	recommendation Strong recommendation
	Weak	recommendation Strong recommendation
	Weak	recommendation
###46###WHO recommendations for the prevention and treatment of postpartum haemorrhage
40
Box	7.	Summary	of	considerations	related	to	the	strength	of	the	recommendations	  
(Recommendations	31–32)	
Recommendation 31 32
Intervention Simulations of PPH 
treatmentMonitoring the use of 
uterotonics
Quality	of	the	
evidence High
 Moderate
 Low
 Very low High
 Moderate
 Low
 Very low
Values and 
preferences	No	significant	variability
	Significant	variability	No	significant	variability
	Significant	variability
Absolute magnitude 
of effect Large effect (RR>2 or 
RR<0.5)
	Small	effect	(0.5<RR<2) Large effect (RR>2 or 
RR<0.5)
	Small	effect	(0.5<RR<2)
Balance of 
benefits	versus	
disadvantages	Benefits	outweigh	
disadvantages
	Benefits	and	disadvantages	
are balanced
 Disadvantages outweigh 
benefits	Benefits	outweigh	
disadvantages
	Benefits	and	disadvantages	
are balanced
 Disadvantages outweigh 
benefits
Resource use  Less resource intensive
 More resource intensive Less resource intensive
 More resource intensive
Feasibility 	Yes 	globally
	Yes 	conditionally	Yes 	globally
	Yes 	conditionally
Recommendation 
direction In favour of the 
intervention
 Against the intervention In favour of the 
intervention
 Against the intervention
Overall	ranking  Strong recommendation
	Weak	recommendation Strong recommendation
	Weak	recommendation
###47###WHO recommendations for the prevention and treatment of postpartum haemorrhage
41
Box	7.	Summary	of	considerations	related	to	the	strength	of	the	recommendations	  
(Recommendations	31–32)	
Recommendation 31 32
Intervention Simulations of PPH 
treatmentMonitoring the use of 
uterotonics
Quality	of	the	
evidence High
 Moderate
 Low
 Very low High
 Moderate
 Low
 Very low
Values and 
preferences	No	significant	variability
	Significant	variability	No	significant	variability
	Significant	variability
Absolute magnitude 
of effect Large effect (RR>2 or 
RR<0.5)
	Small	effect	(0.5<RR<2) Large effect (RR>2 or 
RR<0.5)
	Small	effect	(0.5<RR<2)
Balance of 
benefits	versus	
disadvantages	Benefits	outweigh	
disadvantages
	Benefits	and	disadvantages	
are balanced
 Disadvantages outweigh 
benefits	Benefits	outweigh	
disadvantages
	Benefits	and	disadvantages	
are balanced
 Disadvantages outweigh 
benefits
Resource use  Less resource intensive
 More resource intensive Less resource intensive
 More resource intensive
Feasibility 	Yes 	globally
	Yes 	conditionally	Yes 	globally
	Yes 	conditionally
Recommendation 
direction In favour of the 
intervention
 Against the intervention In favour of the 
intervention
 Against the intervention
Overall	ranking  Strong recommendation
	Weak	recommendation Strong recommendation
	Weak	recommendation
Box	8.	Template	for	the	summary	of	considerations	related	to	the	strength	of	the	recommendations	with	explanations	for	completing	the	template	
Recommendation Which recommendation?
Intervention What is the intervention?
Quality	of	the	
evidence High
 Moderate
 Low
 Very lowThe	higher	the	quality	of	the	evidence 	the	stronger	the	recommendation.
If	the	evidence	quality	is	‘low’ 	or	‘very	low’ 	consider	more	carefully	the	other	criteria	below	in	deciding	the	strength	of	the	
recommendation.
Values and 
preferences	No	significant	variability
	Significant	variabilityThis	refers	to	values	placed	by	health	workers 	policy-makers 	patients	and	other	stakeholders	on	the	intended	outcomes	of	
the interventions.
If	there	is	wide	variability	between	the	values	and	preferences	of	various	stakeholders 	the	intervention	is	less	likely	to	have	a	
strong recommendation.
Magnitude of 
effect in critical 
outcomes Large effect (RR>2 or 
RR<0.5)
	Small	effect	(0.5<RR<2)This refers to the potential of the intervention to have large effects. The effects can be enhanced by being combined with 
other	interventions.	Consider	which	potential	associations	(or	‘bundles’)	can	enhance	effects.
The	larger	the	potential	effects	and	the	longer	the	time	period	of	the	potential	effects 	the	more	likely	the	intervention	is	to	
have a strong recommendation.
Balance of 
benefits	versus	
disadvantages	Benefits	outweigh	
disadvantages
	Benefits	and	
disadvantages are 
balanced
 Disadvantages outweigh 
benefitsBenefits	refer	to	the	intended	positive	effects	of	an	intervention	.
Disadvantages refer to the potentially negative effects of an intervention as well as its unintended effects.
The	fewer	the	potentially	negative	effects	there	are 	the	more	likely	the	intervention	is	to	receive	a	strong	recommendation.
Resource use  Less resource intensive
 More resource intensiveThe	resources	needed	for	the	implementation	of	a	recommendation	may	include	financial	resources 	human	resources 	
and	infrastructure	or	equipment.	Ideally 	the	cost	of	the	benefits	of	an	intervention	should	be	reasonable 	affordable	and	
sustainable.	It	should	be	remembered	that	capital	costs 	such	as	those	required	for	infrastructural	development 	may	be	
initially	high	but	may	also	yield	long-term	benefits.	
Generally 	interventions	that	incur	higher	incremental	or	recurrent	costs	are	less	likely	to	be	strongly	recommended.
Feasibility 	Yes 	globally
	Yes 	conditionallyPolitical	commitment	and	wide	stakeholder	engagement	are	prerequisites	for	interventions.	 The	‘technical’ 	feasibility	of	
interventions	also	depends	on	sufficiently	functional	organizational	and	institutional	structures	to	manage 	follow	through 	
and monitor the implementation of the recommendation. The elements of technical feasibility vary considerably by country 
and	by	context;	where	these	elements	are	likely	to	be	functional	across	a	wide	variety	of	settings	it	is	more	likely	that	
interventions will receive strong recommendations.
Recommendation 
direction In favour of the 
intervention
 Against the intervention
Overall	ranking  Strong recommendation
	Weak	recommendationStrength of the recommendation.
###48###  
WHO recommendations 
for the prevention  
and treatment of  
postpartum haemorrhage
For more information  please contact:
Department of Reproductive Health and Research  
E-mail: reproductivehealth@who.int  
www.who.int/reproductivehealth
Maternal  Newborn  Child and Adolescent Health
E-mail: mncah@who.int
www.who.int/maternal_child_adolescent
World Health Organization  
Avenue Appia 20  CH-1211 Geneva 27  
Switzerland
